• • • 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS- 
The Career Compass  The Career Compass
2 	
The Career Compass 	 The Career Compass
Published by Published by: 
THE THE 
GROVE
TEENATIONA
1000 0'Reilly Avenue 1000 O'Reilly Avenue 
San Franclsco, CA 94129-1124 San Francisco, CA 94129-1124 
+1.415.561.2500 +1.415.561.2500 
www.grove.com   www.grove.com
ISBN: 1-879502-61-5 ISBN: 1-879502-61-5 
Printed in the USA Printed in the USA 
Version 1.0,April 2009 Version 1.0, April 2009 
The Career Compass The Career Compass 
2009 The Grove Consultants International © 2009 The Grove Consultants International. 
All rights reserved under U.S.and international copyright laws and conventions.Any unauthorized All rights reserved under U.S. and international copyright laws and conventions. Any unauthorized 
use of the copyrighted material without the express written consent of the authors is a violation of use of the copyrighted material without the express written consent of the authors is a violation of 
U.S. and international copyright laws.No portion of this publication may be repraduced or U.S. and international copyright laws. No portion of this publication may be reproduced or 
transmitted in any form or media by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording,  transmitted in any form or media by any means,electronic,mechanical,photocopying,recording
or otherwise without the prior written consent of the authors. or otherwise, without the prior written consent of the authors. 
Visual Planning Systems2007-2009,and Graphic Guides1996-2009)are all copyrighted to Visual Planning Systems' (2007-2009), and Graphic Guides® (1996-2009) are all copyrighted to 
The Grove Consultants International. All rights reserved The Grove Consultants International. All rights reserved. 
Printed on recycled paper. This binder is recyclable Printed on recycled paper. This binder is recyclable. 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS" 
2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL-Vr  2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL
• 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS " 	
Contents  Contents
Introduction 	 Introduction
Career Compass Process Overview 	 Career Compass Process Overview
The Career Compass Process: The Career Compass Process: 
Stage 1: Setting Out 	 Stage 1:Setting Out.
Stage 2: History 	 Stage 2: History.....
Stage 3: Preferences & Possibilities 	
Stage 3:Preferences &Possibilities Stage 4: Work/Life Wheel 	 Stage 4:Work/Life Wheel
Stage 5: Choices in Context 	 Stage 5: Choices in Context
Stage 6: Networking Map 	 Stage 6:Networking Map
Stage 7: A Day in the Life 	 Stage 7: A Day in the Life
Stage 8: Path Exploration 	 Stage 8:Path Exploration
Stage 9: Action Plan 	 Stage 9:Action Plan
Conclusion 	 Conclusion.
Appendix 	 Appendix.
Icon References 	 Icon References
Additional Resources 	 Additional Resources
Photocopying Policy 	 Photocopying Policy
Additional Templates 	 Additional Templates
Acknowledgments 	 Acknowledgments
®2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL/P 	 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL
The Career Compass The Career Compass 
5  6 
9  9
17  17
25  25
33  33
41  41
49  49
57  57
65  65
73 :73
79  7 
81 81 
82 .82
84  84
86 .86
87  87
99  99
3 
• 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 	 VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS
Introduction  Introduction
The Career Compass The Career Compass 
Most of us spend at least one-third of our day at work. Many of us will have multiple  Most of us spend at least one-third of our day at work. Many of us wili have multiple
jobs and more than one career. From time to time as circumstances in our lives  jobs and more than one career. From time to time as circumstances in our lives
change, it's beneficial to survey our career and determine if changes need to be  change,it's beneficial to survey our career and determine if changes need to be
made. In some instances, a job or career change will be our choice; at other times  made.In some instances,a job or career change will be our choice; at other times
the change will be outside of our control. Regardless of the circumstances, being  the change will be outside of our control. Regardless of the circumstances, being
prepared for moving on to our next career phase can make the transition less  prepared for moving on to our next career phase can make the transition less
stressful and more rewarding.  stressful and more rewarding.
The Career Compass is a Visual Planning System -' that will help you creatively  The Career Compass is a Visual Planning System that will help you creatively
organize and manage your career options. The templates in this system take you  organize and manage your career options.The templates in this system take you
through a step-by-step process that includes assessing your past and present,  through a step-by-step process that includes assessing your past and present,
researching future possibilities, imagining yourself in different careers, and finally  researching future possibilities, imagining yourself in different careers,and finally
creating job search and networking plans to fulfill your self-defined goals.  creating job search and networking plans to fulfill your self-defined goals.
How to Use These Materials  How to Use These Materials
A career counselor or career coach can help you progress through each of the steps  fetretrerrttrereneettrrererernereoorrerrorerroteerrereetrrnereooeerss
and provide additional insight and resources. A career counselor will also help you  and provide additional insight and resources.A career counselor will also help you
stay on task and keep the process going until you have completed the final stage  Tirarrrtttetoreerentrrrerrrerrnrtrererettrertrrtereitee
and are on your way to making a change. A good resource for finding a counselor is  and are on your way to making a change. A good resource for finding a counselor is
the National Career Development Association (www.ncda.org ).  the National Career Development Association (www.ncda.org).
If you would like to complete the process on your own, additional books and  If you would like to complete the process on your own,additional books and
websites are provided throughout The Career Compass and in the Appendix to help  websites are provided throughout The Career Compass and in the Appendix to help
you. We also recommend that you talk with family and/or friends to provide support  you.We also recommend that you talk with family and/or friends to provide support
as you move through the stages.  as you move through the stages.
There is no wrong way of working with these templates. The content you provide  There is no wrong way of working with these templates. The content you provide
from your own experience and research will create maps for successfully navigating  from your own experience and research will create maps for successfully navigating
your career change. Often, the immediate need for a new job will dictate how much  your career change. Often,the immediate need for a new job will dictate how much
time you can give to the entire process. If time permits, it is advantageous to allow  time you can give to the entire process.If time permits,it is advantageous to allow
time for reflection after each stages. Some templates will also require you to repeat  time for reflection after each stages.Some templates will also reguire you to repeat
them until you are satisfied with the outcome and ready to move onto the next  them until you are satisfied with the outcome and ready to move onto the next
stage. For this reason, there are extra copies of certain templates provided in the  stage.For this reason, there are extra copies of certain templates provided in the
Appendix. To make it easy for you, we recommend that you take the templates out of  Appendix. To make it easy for you,we recommend that you take the templates out of
the binder and work on them as you follow the instructions.  the binder and work on them as you follow the instructions.
You may want to add additional research, job leads, and job offers to this binder— You may want to add additional research,job leads, and job offers to this binder-
as well as your resume, cover letters, thank-you notes, and any other specific  as well as your resume,cover letters,thank-you notes, and any other specific
information to stay organized. Once you have a new job or career direction, be sure  information to stay organized.Once you have a new job or career direction,be sure
to keep your binder for reference at a later date or when it is time to reassess and  to keep your binder for reference at a later date or when it is time to reassess and
perhaps make another change.  perhaps make another change
G 2O09THE GROVE CONSULTANTSINTERNATIONALV © 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONA 	
U 5 
6 	
The Career Compass 	 The Career Compass
Career Compass Process Overview  Career Compass Process Overview
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 
Orient To Career Planning 	
Assess Who You Are & 
Orient To Career Planning
Assess Who You Are &
What You Want  What You Want
Stage 1:  SETTING OUT  Stage 1:SETTING OUT
Clarify your reasons for career exploration— Clarify your reasons for career exploration-
where you are now and where you want to be.  where you are now and where you want to be
Stage 2:  HISTORY  Stage 2:HISTORY
HISTORY
G.=,....  A 	A, . **
B z,  
Learn from the past in order to make informed  Learn from the past in order to make informed
decisions about your future.  decisions about your future
PREFERENCES & POSSIBILITIES 
Stage 3PREFERENCES&POSSIBILITIES
PREFERENCES&POSSIBILITIES
Clarify who you are, and learn about the  Clarify who you are,and learn about the
occupations that might fit you.  occupations that might fit you
Stage 4:  WORK/LIFE WHEEL  Stage 4:WORK/LIFE WHEEL
WORK/LIFEWHEEI
Imagine your preferred future, both at work and  Imagine your preferred future.both at work anc
outside of work, in order to set priorities.  outside of work. in order to set priorities
2009THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL © 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALS 
• • • 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 
Research Your Options  Research Your Options
Stage 5:  CHOICES IN CONTEXT  Stage 5:CHOICES IN CONTEXT
• ....°"1"" • 
Begin researching occupations through secondary Begin researching occupations through secondary 
research: websites and publications.  research: websites and publications
Stage 6:  NETWORKING MAP  Stage 6:NETWORKING MAP
Start contacting others to learn firsthand about  Start contacting others to learn firsthand about
occupations and to create connections.  occupations and to create connections
Stage 7:  A DAY IN THE LIFE  Stage 7:A DAY IN THE LIFE
Continue your primary research—talking with  Continue your primary research-talking with
others—to imagine yourself in an occupation.  others--to imagine yourself in an occupation.
2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL
0 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL' 	
The Career Compass  The Career Compass
Focus Your Job Search  Focus Your Job Search
Stage 8:  PATH EXPLORATION  Stage 8:PATH EXPLORATION
TH EXPLORATIOR
Decide on and craft the career path you want Decide on and craft the career path you want, 
while keeping a backup plan as an option.  while keeping a backup plan as an option
Stage 9:  ACTION PLAN  Stage 9:ACTION PLAN
Lay out the steps of your job search, and stay  Lay out the steps of your job search,and stay
motivated to land the job you want.  motivated to land the job you want
7 
• 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 	 VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS
Stage  Stage 1
SETTING OUT  SETTING OUT
The Career Compass The Career Compass 
Welcome to The Career Compass. You are beginning a thought-provoking,  Welcome to The Career Compass.You are beginning a thought-provoking
comprehensive process that will help you make informed career decisions.  comprehensive process that will help you make informed career decisions.
Whether you are just starting out in the work force, are in the middle of  Whether you are just starting out in the work force,are in the middle of
your career but seeking something new, or are nearing retirement and  your career but seeking something new,or are nearing retirement and
need to make a transition out of full-time work, The Career Compass  need to make a transition out of full-time work, The Career Compass
will help you visualize and make change. The following instructions and  will help you visualize and make change.The following instructions and
templates provide frameworks for organizing your thoughts and research  templates provide frameworks for organizing your thoughts and research
and developing your plans.  and developing your plans.
In this first stage, Setting Out, you will record your expectations for a  In this first stage,Setting Out,you will record your expectations for a
career-change process. It is important for you (as well as your career  career-change process.it is important for you (as well as your career
counselor) to understand your motivation for embarking on this process.  counselor to understand your motivation for embarking on this process.
Setting Out provides a quick view of your current context and maps the  Setting Out provides a guick view of your current context and maps the
beginnings of a future direction.  beginnings of a future direction.
SETTING OUT
STARTINGPON  
You'll always miss 100 percent of the shots  You'll always miss 100 percent of the shots
you don't take. you don't take. 
Wayne Gretzky Wayne Gretzky 
0 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL-VI?' 	 G 2O09 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL
9 
SETTING OUT ino  ON1113S 
10 	 1
The Career Compass 	 The Career Compass
SETTING OUT  SETTING OUT
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 
Clarify Your Current Situation  Clarify Your Current Situation
Take a moment to explain where you stand currently and where you want to be when you have  Take a moment to explain where you stand currently and where you want to be when you have
completed The Career Compass process. You'll need to express your commitment to change  Cererreereereeereeeereeeerreettreeerrrreretreererroteortreetoooeree
and the supports and challenges that may affect your progress. There are no "right" or "wrong"  and the supports and challenges that may affect your progress.There are no "right"or "wrong
answers—each person's situation is unique.  answers- each person's situation is unique.
STEPS  STEPS
For ease of use, we recommend you first take each template out of the binder and fill it in as  For ease of use,we recommend you first take each template out of the binder and fill it in as
you read through the steps. Each template can be found following the instructions and sample  you read through the steps. Each template can be found following the instructions and sample
answers. (See page 13.)  answers.(See page 13.)
STARTING POINT  STARTING POINT
Why do you want to go through this process? Why now? Record the reasons why you  1. Why do you want to go through this process? Why now? Record the reasons why you
want to explore your career options. It might be that you don't like the work you are currently  want to explore your career options.It might be that you don't like the work you are currently
doing, or perhaps the management of your organization has changed and things that you liked  doing,or perhaps the management of your organization has changed and things that you liked
about your organization no longer apply. You may like the organization you work for, but want  about your organization no longer apply. You may like the organization you work for,but want
to explore other positions. Or perhaps you foresee changes ahead in your job or organization  to explore other positions.Or perhaps you foresee changes ahead in your job or organization
and you want to be prepared just in case. There may be changes in your personal life—getting  and you want to be prepared just in case.There may be changes in your personal life-getting
married, getting divorced, having a child or moving—that require you to make changes in your  married,getting divorced,having a child or moving--that require you to make changes in your
job. Or maybe you are finishing school and entering the workforce as a high-school or college  job. Or maybe you are finishing school and entering the workforce as a high-school or college
graduate. Whatever your reasons are, write down why you are seeking something new.  graduate.Whatever your reasons are,write down why you are seeking something new.
ENDING POINT  ENDING POINT
Primary outcome: What is the main goal you want to reach after completing this process?  2. Primary outcome: What is the main goal you want to reach after completing this process
Write down what you would like to accomplish. Is it a new job, a promotion, or the same  Write down what you would like to accomplish.is it a new job,a promotion,or the same
position with a different industry or employer? Perhaps you are considering a return to school  position with a different industry or employer Perhaps you are considering a return to school
and you want to confirm that the program you choose will be most beneficial for your career  and you want to confirm that the program you choose will be most beneficial for your career
goals. Whether it is job or school related, write down your main objective for completing The  goals.Whether it is job or school related,write down your main objective for completing The
Career Compass process.  Career Compass process.
Secondary outcomes: What would you like to gain in addition to your primary outcome? For  3. Secondary outcomes:What would you like to gain in addition to your primary outcome? For
example, you may want to learn about different industries, to have a better understanding of  example,you may want to learn about different industries,to have a better understanding of
careers that suit your personal preferences, or to discover where to look for new opportunities.  careers that suit your personal preferences,or to discover where to look for new opportunities
Or, you may have wishes that relate to your personal life.  Or, you may have wishes that relate to your personal life.
Time frame: Some individuals will begin this process only after the need to find a new job is  4. Time frame: Some individuals will begin this process only after the need to find a new job is
immediate. Depending on the job market and your experience, a short goal may be possible,  immediate.Depending on the job market and your experience,a short goal may be possible
but for others it may take at least four to six weeks to find a new job. If you are completing  but for others it may take at least four to six weeks to find a new job.If you are completing
this process in order to make long-range decisions, you may need six months, a year or more  this process in order to make long-range decisions,you may need six months,a year or more
to make a transition. Record your time frame goal in the space provided.  to make a transition.Record your time frame goal in the space provided.
Resources/supports: It is beneficial to identify the people, places and things that can help  5. Resources/supports:It is beneficial to identify the peopie,places and things that can help
you through this process. If you hit a rough patch, your resources and supports will help get  you through this process.If you hit a rough patch,your resources and supports will help get
you back on track. Your resources and supports might include a career counselor or coach,  you back on track.Your resources and supports might include a career counselor or coach,
your family members, friends or possibly coworkers. If you have been laid off, you may be  your family members,friends or possibly coworkers.If you have been laid off,you may be
receiving outplacement services or have a support group of other employees who were  receiving outplacement services or have a support group of other employees who were
laid off with you. Other resources could include professional organizations or websites with  laid off with you.Other resources could include professional organizations or websites with
employment information.  employment information.
2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL ®2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL'(t 
• • • 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 	
The Career Compass 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS
The Career Compass
Simply talking with others will prove to be a great support and could create opportunities.  Simply talking with others will prove to be a great support and could create opportunities.
We recommend that you familiarize yourself with the Networking Map (page 49) early in the  We recommend that you familiarize yourself with the Networking Map (page 49 early in the
process as you begin making connections with people. Keeping track of your contacts from  process as you begin making connections with people. Keeping track of your contacts from
the onset will greatly help you as you continue to expand your network.  the onset will greatly help you as you continue to expand your network.
6.  6
Potential challenges: Write down any challenges that might make this process difficult. For  Potential challenges: Write down any challenges that might make this process difficult. For
example, you may have commitments at home that need to be handled in a timely manner. Or,  example,you may have commitments at home that need to be handled in a timely manner.Or
you may be great at starting the process, but feel uncomfortable with certain steps and have  you may be great at starting the process,but feel uncomfortable with certain steps and have
trouble completing everything. There may be behaviors or attitudes you need to change in  trouble completing everything.There may be behaviors or attitudes you need to change in
order to move forward. It is best to identify these issues so you will be prepared to deal with  order to move forward.It is best to identify these issues so you will be prepared to deal with
them when they appear.  them when they appear.
How will you commit to this process? First, write down your level of commitment. If you  7. 
7.How will you commit to this process? First,write down your level of commitment.If you
have decided to do this on your own, you are most likely very committed to the outcome.  have decided to do this on your own,you are most likely very committed to the outcome.
However, if someone else is asking you to address your career—your family, employer or  However,if someone else is asking you to address your career-your family,employer or
professor—you may not be as vested. Whatever your reasons, be honest with your level of  professor--you may not be as vested.Whatever your reasons,be honest with your level of
commitment. If you are not very committed, perhaps there is someone who can help you see  commitment.If you are not very committed,perhaps there is someone who can help you see
the value of making a change. Also, if you tell someone else that you are committing to the  the value of making a change.Also,if you tell someone else that you are committing to the
process you will become more accountable.  process you will become more accountable.
Next, write down what you can do to stay on task. You may want to complete The Career  Next.write down what you can do to stay on task. You may want to complete The Career
Compass steps in a few short weeks and make appointments with another person to review  Compass steps in a few short weeks and make appointments with another person to review
your completed templates. Or perhaps you and a friend could work through The Career  your completed templates.Or perhaps you and a friend could work through The Career
Compass together, providing mutual support along the way. Regardless of your methods, write  Compass together,providing mutual support along the way. Regardless of your methods,write
down what will keep you motivated.  down what will keep you motivated.
Your completed Setting Out template prepares you for the steps ahead. Keep in mind that nothing  Your completed Setting Out template prepares you for the steps ahead.Keep in mind that nothing
is set in stone. For instance, you may find that while going through the rest of The Career Compass  is set in stone. For instance,you may find that while going through the rest of The Career Compass
you want to revisit your primary and secondary outcomes. Feel free to adjust these as you move  you want to revisit your primary and secondary outcomes.Feel free to adjust these as you move
along.  along.
Use the "Notes" page following the template to capture any additional observations or thoughts.  Use the "Notes"page following the template to capture any additional observations or thoughts
2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALr 	 O 2OO9 THEGROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALY
11 
START  START
HERE  HERE
12
12 	
The Career Compass 	 The Career Compass
Sample Answers for Setting Out:  Sample Answers for Setting Out
1. WHY GO THROUGH THIS 
WHY GO THROUGH THIS
PROCESS?: Graduating from  PRoCESS?:Graduating from
college; laid off; moved to new  college;laid off;moved to new
location; returning to work after  location; returning to work after
having children; not happy in my  having children not happy in my
current job.  current job
Th CSETTING OUT The Ca Compass  SETTING OUT 
STARTING POINT STARTING POINT 
•
Why Ms Ih,W MN preemulT 
PRIMARY OUTCOME: New job  PRIMARY OUTCOME:NeW job
2.
in management; get master's  in management; get master's
degree; start my own business;  degree; start my own business;
move to New York; get a job  move to New York: get a job
that is a better fit for my  that is a better fit for my
interests.  interests.
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 
SECONDARY OUTCOMES: 
3.
SECONDARY OUTCOMES
Take on more responsibility;  Take on more responsibility
travel less in my job; present  travel less in my job; present
at a conference; make more  at a conferencemake more
money.  money.
ENDING POINT ENDING POINT 
&SECONDARY OUTGO 
RY OUTOO
• 
nRE EPsNE .  
Haw ill yo comm*how mu you rorowt 
So MN process? 
GRESOURCES
RESOURCES/SUPPORTS 
4. TIME FRAME: New 	
5 
RESOURCES/SUPPORTS: 
4.TIME FRAME:New
RESOURCES/SUPPORTS
5
job in 3 months; 
job in 3 months; career change in  career change in
12 months; get  12 months;get
internship this  internship this
summer then new  summer then new
job within a year; be  job within a year; be
accepted in graduate  accepted in graduate
school next spring.  school next spring
Family; support group;  Familysupport group;
friends; counselor;  friends:counselor:
spouse; professional  spouseprofessional
organizations; alumni  organizations;alumni
associations; websites.  associations:websites
A completed template might look like this:  A completed template might look like this
Th CCs SETTING OUT The Career Compaas  SETTING OUT 
STARTING POINT STARTING POINT 
C Why go through this
*Why  EH  through MM prows, 
Why no,  Winy new?
• UM* 	navied 
.-po cacti 'Yowl IA RI DRWERt, ;SD  T c in myb
Chia( fan Mat 
a
io 	
0
as mat.  W S0
wps 
efaciulift SAS( 
Y11 GM
.1J* suit A* III  101-  she .s-  f'e ut my f shpis
TIME FRAME TIME FRAME: 
ua m Oe t
- GPsaMP• RY 1h GE —last foe job by   n b y
Jo,*s
LEV CTHEAT
of freer NW'  HIGH
HIGH 	 '
How wll you comm H 
 will you corp.! 
to this process?  to this process
Veso mlar
WCw CANSEbY
GPOTE
'POTENTIAL CHALLENGES 
limidworpence
wo& cypwence 
• 
owt side te theatpr a4A-sidt -4.4 treater. 
• ne&S to Fa‘ OCP drAck.i- laws.  Sp
. hard It stp.. motivaieot -ffnoptoy,   mey-Pyap  
potoos
2po
Have d o m
nAad
ess. 
ente pritess. e.two 	
icappoinPamily
• dee.4-  e.4,4 41) d;Cflppo4.44-'  need cavn #• ritO io urn *tor mit- 
E POTENTIAL 
POTENTIAL
6.
CHALLENGES:  CHALLENGES:
Money constraints;  Money constraints;
hard to find time to  hard to find time tol
do this; fear that I  do this:fear thatl
won't like my new  won't like my new
job; fear of being job; fear of being 
too ambitious;  too ambitious;
fear that I'm not  fear that I'm not
qualified; fear of qualified; fear of 
change.  change.
ENDING POINT ENDING POINT 
SECONDARY OUTCOMES y SomiDf 
in +he b+s.
PRIMARY OUTCOME*PRIMARY OUTCOME 
*inoroue y o  Dalance.
Sodle time each Kon Hwmolales
7 COM MITMENT:  7.
COMMITMENT Commitment  Commitment
level=10. Will  level=10.Will
work with a career  work with a career
counselor; go  counselor;go
to a job-search  to a job-search
group; talk with my  group;talk with my
manager; work with  managerwork with
a mentor; complete  a mentor;complete
two templates each  two templates each
week.  week.
+uce my Drotale CROEC.
Find f-me bcloce  me/ e or no hrcing Sin
I love.
@RESOURCES/SUPPORTS'RESOURCES/SUPPORTS 
Career Caelor• eWetr CAAPCOr 
eiucbad• KIS kNIM 
SMossajexd• WASS.' 5 
ernsnip Superusor• iMitAfISA;F:, SAVOT,ASoffe 
• 
Iy  fami ly
„cAree.-t- # Fasi-  bosses 
pastbesses
currenf
ta.m Owns -9rt, ens.. Gage mots TM CAOVOgr 
2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL C 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALV.- 
The Career Compass  SETTING OUT 
SETTING OUT
The Career Compass
STARTING POINT  STARTING POINT
Why go through this process? Why go through this process? 
Why now?  Why now?
• 
POTENTIAL CHALLENGES  POTENTIAL CHALLENGES
40  TIME FRAME:  TIME FRAME
How will you commit  How will you commit
to this process?  to this process?
• 
ENDING POINT  ENDINGPOINT
SECONDARY OUTCOMES  SECONDARY OUTCOMES
PRIMARY OUTCOME
L., RESOURCES/SUPPORTS  RESOURCES/SUPPORTS
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 	 VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS
Notes:  Notes:
C2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL © 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONA 	
The Career Compass  The Career Compass
1 15 
• • • 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 	
Stage 2  Stage 2
HISTORY  HISTORY
The Career Compass The Career Compass 
Now that you have begun to map your current situation and have taken your  Now that you have begun to map your current situation and have taken your
first steps forward in Setting Out, you will look back to your past. Mapping  first steps forward in Setting Out,you will look back to your past.Mapping
your educational, work and life experiences helps reveal where you are  your educational, work and life experiences helps reveal where you are
coming from, what has motivated you throughout your life, and especially  coming from,what has motivated you throughout your life,and especially
what you have liked and disliked along the way. Learning from the past can  what you have liked and disliked along the way. Learning from the past can
help you craft a more ideal future.  help you craft a more ideal future.
By graphically charting your history, you may see patterns that you were  By graphically charting your history,you may see patterns that you were
unaware of. You may be surprised at the skills you have developed over  unaware of. You may be surprised at the skills you have developed over
the years. On the other hand, you may be amazed that you keep ending up  the years.On the other hand,you may be amazed that you keep ending up
in similar situations that are unsatisfying. Your History may also help you  in similar situations that are unsatisfying. Your History may also help you
remember things that you once loved doing but haven't done in years, or  remember things that you once loved doing but haven't done in years, or
experiences that you once found very fulfilling. For some, charting a History  Rrrrreerrenrrrrrrryirorniotrernrrtnrrrrtrrrtnrtrtrry
can be a challenging experience. If this is true for you, try to get the facts  can be a challenging experience.if this is true for you,try to get the facts
down without judgment. Keep in mind that this template can be a useful first  down without judgment.Keep in mind that this template can be a useful first
step in building your resume.  step in building your resume.
HISTORY
G
•  co4. •  Asnounoms 
W• YR 
16.61661665 
6 	 ILLS  O
Learn from yesterday, live for today,  Learn from yesterday live for today
hope for tomorrow. The important thing  hope for tomorrow.The important thing
is not to stop questioning.  is not to stop questioning
Albert Einstein  Albert Einstein
O2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALV 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL 
17
HISTORY
18 	 1
The Career Compass 	 The Career Compass
HISTORY  HISTORY
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 
Looking Back to Move Forward  Looking Back to Move Forward
The History template helps you review your career history in a creative yet organized manner.  The History template helps you review your career history in a creative yet organized manner
Charting your career history is an effective way to see patterns and build understanding about your  Charting your career history is an effective way to see patterns and build understanding about your
development as you prepare for the future.  development as you prepare for the future.
STEPS
We suggest following the sequence below for each horizontal stream of information, starting at  We suggest following the sequence below for each horizontal stream of information,starting at
the bottom and working your way up the template. Within each stream it is permissible and often  the bottom and working your way up the template.Within each stream it is permissible and ofter
desirable to hop around the timeline. Recording something that happened in 2000 may remind  desirable to hop around the timeline.Recording something that happened in 2000 may remind
you of something that happened in 1995.  you of something that happened in 1995.
Dateline: Begin by putting dates on the dateline. Start at the far right with the current year.  1. Dateline: Begin by putting dates on the dateline.Start at the far right with the current year
Work backward, one year at a time for the first few years, then increase the time between  Work backward.one year at a time for the first few vears.then increase the time between
dates to two, five or ten years to, ideally, take the dateline back to high school. We suggest  dates to two,five or ten years to,ideally,take the dateline back to high school.We suggest
using multiple templates if your work history is extensive. (See the Appendix for an additional  using multiple templates if your work history is extensive.(See the Appendix for an additional
History template if needed.)  History template if needed.)
Education: Record both formal and informal education. Formal education includes high  2. Education: Record both formal and informal education.Formal education includes high
school, college and graduate school. Informal education refers to different types of  school, college and graduate school.Informal education refers to different types of
professional development, such as workshops and conferences, as well as important books or  professional development, such as workshops and conferences,as well as important books or
magazines that have impacted you. Learning experiences on the job or in the community are  magazines that have impacted you. Learning experiences on the job or in the community are
also part of your education.  also part of your education.
Work Experience & Skills: Chart your employment history and any volunteer work you may  3. Work Experience & Skills:Chart your employment history and any volunteer work you may
have done. Include job titles and a few words about the responsibilities involved. In addition,  have done.Include job titles and a few words about the responsibilities involved. In addition
record any skills that were developed and any knowledge gained from these work experiences.  record any skills that were developed and any knowledge gained from these work experiences
You can use this information when you build your resume.  You can use this information when you build your resume.
Life Experiences: Think of life experiences as the items that fill your scrapbook: the people,  4.Life Experiences:Think of life experiences as the items that fill your scrapbook:the people
places, events and decisions that are noteworthy in your history.  places, events and decisions that are noteworthy in your history
People & Places: Chart the people and places that have made an impact on your life. 
4a.People & Places:Chart the people and places that have made an impact on your life.
People may include family members, friends, community members, coworkers, mentors,  People may include family members,friends,community members,coworkers,mentors,
neighbors, and so on. Continue to fill in the template with the places you have lived or  neighbors,and so on.Continue to fill in the template with the places you have lived or
visited for significant amounts of time. Different homes, cities, states and countries are  visited for significant amounts of time.Different homes,cities.states and countries are
all relevant.  all relevant.
Key Events & Big Decisions: As you acknowledge significant people and places, let the  4b.Key Events & Big Decisions:As you acknowledge significant people and places,let the
flow of information lead to key events and decisions that have impacted your life. This  flow of information lead to key events and decisions that have impacted your life. This
is the place to reflect on major events in your life, both positive and negative. Events  is the place to reflect on major events in your life,both positive and negative. Events
such as getting married, having children, moving to a new location, going back to school,  such as getting married,having children,moving to a new location,going back to school
dealing with health issues, buying a house, getting a divorce, caring for a sick relative and  dealing with health issues,buying a house,getting a divorce, caring for a sick relative and
mourning a loss are all major milestones worthy of noting. External forces such as world  mourning a loss are all major milestones worthy of noting.External forces such as world
events or economic trends may have had an impact on your life as well.  events or economic trends may have had an impact on your life as well.
Goals & Aspirations: Record high-level inspirations and motivations that influenced your life  5.Goals & Aspirations:Record high-level inspirations and motivations that influenced your life
at any given time. List career aspirations, hobbies, interests or any ambitions you had at any  at any given time. List career aspirations,hobbies, interests or any ambitions you had at any
period in your life.  period in your life.
2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTENATIONAL © 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL -S\.(7 
• • • 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 	 VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS
The Career Compass The Career Compass 
6.  Insight: This is the space to reflect on information your have recorded for Steps 1 through 5.  6. Insight: This is the space to reflect on information your have recorded for Steps 1 through 5
6a. Reread the data and note your happiest moments by either putting a "+" sign next to  6a.Reread the data and note your happiest moments by either putting a "+"sign next to
them or by circling the items with a certain color pen. Note negative times in your history  them or by circling the items with a certain color pen. Note negative times in your history
with a "-" sign or by circling with a different color pen.  with a sign or by circling with a different color pen.
6b. Record the big ideas or themes you see in your history. Note common trends or patterns  6b.Record the big ideas or themes you see in your history. Note common trends or patterns
that emerge. You may learn what you wish to bring into the future and what you wish to  that emerge.You may learn what you wish to bring into the future and what you wish to
leave behind. Ask yourself these questions to build deeper understanding: When did you  leave behind. Ask yourself these guestions to build deeper understandingWhen did you
take risks? What kind? What events helped you learn the most about yourself? Are there  take risks? What kind? What events helped you learn the most about yourself? Are there
past ambitions that intrigue you? Were there any key events that influenced changes in  past ambitions that intrigue you? Were there any key events that influenced changes in
work experience or goals? How did you make big decisions in the past?  work experience or goals? How did you make big decisions in the past
Reviewing your History template with a counselor or trusted friend may help bring the big picture of  Reviewing your History template with a counselor or trusted friend may help bring the big picture of
your past into focus and move you forward in your career choices.  your past into focus and move you forward in your career choices.
Use the "Notes"page following the template to capture any additional observations or thoughts Use the "Notes" page following the template to capture any additional observations or thoughts. 
2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALVP 	 O 2O09 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL
1 19 
	 	 	
START  START
HERE  HERE
20 20 
The Career Compass  The Career Compass
Sample Answers for History:  Sample Answers for History
LIFE EXPERIENCES: I moved  LIFE EXPERIENCES:I mOVed
to Virginia. I had an influential  to Virginia.I had an influential
college professor. I met my  college professor.I met my
wife. I bought my first house.  wife.I bought my first house.
I broke my leg skiing. I lost  I broke my leg skiing.I lost
a dear friend to cancer.  a dear friend to cancer
Economic downturn.  Economic downturn.
HISTORY
UYS
EXPERIENCES XPERIENCE
1.  DATELINE: Fill in the years 
DATELINE:Fill in the years of your History starting from  of your History starting from
the right (current year) and  the right(current year and
working backward in time  working backward in time
as you move to the left  as you move to the left
(high school). A person who (high school).A person who
graduated high school in  graduated high school in
1989 would review years 1989 would review years 
1987 to the current year.  1987 to the current year.
5
GOALS & ASPIRATIONS:  GOALS&ASPIRATIONS
Becoming a lawyer; becoming  Becoming a lawyer becoming
a chef; traveling the world;  a chef; traveling the world
playing guitar; photography;  playing guitar;photography
parenthood.  parenthood.
2  EDUCATION: I graduated from 
EDUCATIONI graduated from
2
high school in 1989. I went  high school in 1989.I went
to college from 1989-1993 to college from 1989-1993 
at UCLA, majoring in political  at UCLA,majoring in political
science. I took Spanish  science.I took Spanish
courses at City College  courses at City College
in Dayton, Ohio. I went to  in Davton.Ohio.Iwent to
cooking workshops.  cooking workshops
A completed template might look like this:  A completed template might look like this:
The Career Compass H ISTORY  The Carer CompaHISTORY
v..;.,,s 63 	 fic........ 
@INSIGHT• INSIGHT 
/C) • GOALS &  GOALS ASPIRATIONS  ASPIRATIONS
4..4(   OLIFE LIFE • 
EXPERIENCES ',.(N.I ''' *, I 
S WORK.  WORK 
EXPERIENCE EXPERIENCE 
& SKILLS  SKILLS
.1CL *EDUCATION  EEDUC
fir  DMus. 
t' 
1 	
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 
INSIGHT: I really enjoyed  INSIGHTI really enjoye
6.
working in a social  working in a social
environment. I tend to  environment.I tend to
move when I have personal  move when I have personal
problems. I was most fulfilled  problems.l was most fulfilled
when I was being creative. I  when I was being creative.I
like taking on responsibility.  like taking on responsibility
WORK EXPERIENCE &  3.WORK EXPERIENCE &
SKILLS: I was a project  SKILLS:I was a project
manager. Responsibilities:  manager.Responsibilities:
account management, client  account management, client
relations, financial tracking.  relations,financial tracking
Skills developed: presenting,  Skills developed: presenting
team management, client  team management, client
interfacing. interfacing. 
1 ,,„=,,,, 	
40.4..1.4 	4 s... 
fo 	qt....* 
, ,..
I va
"'"h".  411 *La.*, 	
4....:IL 	
. 	
l'""". 11  
E
---!**1)  *  SKetmeweL 
guwou +
-.KIWNwl,  'V 	
, 
(_,) 
0.11'....+teAvas 1..  DmmTAVE
Ne.
 iy  
e7:11 	
4",'..z„ 
Islar laiy ri, ,o,.. 
114.,..........,—. 
.9,  
–....z•
S.V.4.411 	
lit:7. 
8 v.4.4, 
43-  --,ife..:..-, 
-74.1  ..sam4t  	'
--1--_.
 "4"*.' . .4  - 	
.-'1".=  filaugip  pe
 15"14'  	„.±,NSietset,=,,-.„ "-...11... 	P"t7 
  
AL  
I,  '  tl,  malat 
pliNWS.  DgffJ, t„7,—
' 	
1.... 	
J. 	 L,"4 	
	
1oi0e
 -e t , 	, 	s ''' 
1,....iamt....   
bock. f s 
L
Sta
tem,* eteeru k t2e,Z, Apt.er., 	 N
B
Ili ' 	
I 
, 	I' 
't,  I  t  . 
 
i 	 tt t ,  - 	, 
2av
.,.., 4har...,  
 
"" 
'r".  k=1. 
p...,,t W.,!.,‘:;,'';,• 57 	 VI" 	;i". t"4  	
Ilt3gwly 
.fr:   $3ph
,..., rtZ 
ta7", 	...,g,„ 
	 1,,,,. 
,wiL. 	,.. 	
,,Jin  m... 	
h 	
Naweikk 	
,,,,,m , 	
p.  
*  VI  s.  	*we– ,,.... 	
/F.,  masy 	ie.  „fp, 	 "'I 
, 	
,..I 	tn.ult 	
•
e  
,I••••ero..4.'"''' 
An•PANA1s*,AM 	5.• Sy...a 	IhNSeN 	/Awash 
—0 
1  • 
ti-....c.A. 
welINM 	 I{  weft..  , 
iitmar41:rci, 
5l3P461 
r i  -;= 	
 
4 
.E.. 
	
ee 
--  „,,,,,,,, 	_ 
Y•meepeme• 
'  ' 
^ 	
1
,,,,,..., 	ASoesvera 	-0/V
_ 	
•-= ‘,..,,,,,,,,,,, ta. 	
..."- 	.ii."!.P.1 
gv....14.
r-1 	
ard,I. 	
ell
.,„4.63.., 	•N,mwo•NT
..„4 
eu
, 	 ,
iris 
+ 
Latrouk, 
b
14,1 	6 tt„,   ilf  P'''.44  
trOb,   ma
PI 'P' 
, 	 , 	
So.e/WA4,1ss 
 
, 	 A. 
".. 
'....".. 	
r .14-  
:11Nejst.A•m*, 
61t 
en 	vr----7  
tAduke
 
•  MLN..„.;40 -7---
lwe•PH 
AaG
.,,,,0.„.41_
'.4..°   Sod 
O 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL 0 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL 
The Career Compass  H ISTORY  The Career Compass HISTORY
•  INSIGHT
GOALS &
ASPIRATIONS*** LIFE
• 
EXPERIENCES WORK
EXPERIENCE&SKILLS
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS' 	 VISUALPLANNING SYSTEMS
Notes:  Notes:
© 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALr 	 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL
The Career Compass  The Career Compass
3 23 
• 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 	 VISUALPLANNING SYSTEMS
Stage 3  Stage 3
PREFERENCES & POSSIBILITIES  PREFERENCES & POSSIBILITIES
The Career Compass  The Career Compass
By looking at your History, you may have learned about patterns in your  By looking at your History,you may have learned about patterns in your
life. You may be thinking about things you want to continue or develop and  life.You may be thinking about things you want to continue or develop anc
perhaps some things that you don't want to repeat. At the very least, we  perhaps some things that you don't want to repeat.At the very least,we
hope that you have recorded some of your likes and dislikes.  hope that you have recorded some of your likes and dislikes.
This next template, Preferences & Possibilities, will give you a fuller picture  This next template, Preferences & Possibilities,will give you a fuller picture
of your personal profile. The Preferences & Possibilities template is a holding  of your personal profile.The Preferences & Possibilities template is a holding
space for all of the information gathered from various assessment tests  space for all of the information gathered from various assessment tests
(usually administered by career counselors) that provide a comprehensive (usually administered by career counselors that provide a comprehensive
understanding of who you are. Once you have completed assessment tests  understanding of who you are.Once you have completed assessment tests
about your unique personality, interests, values, skills and strengths, you will  about your unique personality,interests,values, skills and strengths,you will
be able to map job families and occupations that others like you gravitate  be able to map job families and occupations that others like you gravitate
toward.  toward.
We all have possibilities we don't  We all have possibilities we don't
know about. We can do things we  know about. We can do things we
don't even dream we can do.  don't even dream we can do
Dale Carnegie  Dale Carnegie
2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL © 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALVi.  
25 25 
PREFERENCES&POSSIBILITIES N3e13d3. 
 . 31111181SSOd S 
26 	 26
The Career Compass 	 The Career Compass
PREFERENCES & POSSIBILITIES  PREFERENCES & POSSIBILITIES
Your Profile Reveals Your Options  Your Profile Reveals Your Options
VISAL PLANNNG SYSTEMS VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 
The Preferences & Possibilities template helps you synthesize results from a variety of career  The Preferences & Possibilities template helps you synthesize results from a variety of career
counseling assessment tools on a big-picture, comprehensive map. Each assessment may have  counseling assessment tools on a big-picture,comprehensive map. Each assessment may have
its own workbook or report to help you discuss results with your career counselor. This template  its own workbook or report to help you discuss results with your career counselor.This template
takes the evaluation process to the next level by revealing common themes and tendencies and  takes the evaluation process to the next level by revealing common themes and tendencies and
helps you begin focusing your choices. By seeing a map of your "world" you are able to state who  helps you begin focusing your choices.By seeing a map of your "worldyou are able to state who
you are at this point in time, providing a strong foundation for your career plan.  you are at this point in time, providing a strong foundation for your career plan.
STEPS  STEPS
This template is designed to hold assessment results provided by other sources. Please request the  This template is designed to hold assessment results provided by other sources.Please request the
appropriate tests from your career counselor or take tests online, or those offered in books, before  appropriate tests from your career counselor or take tests online,or those offered in books,before
completing this template. Each step references commonly used tests that will provide appropriate  completing this template. Each step references commonly used tests that will provide appropriate
results. We highly recommend that you work with a counselor who is trained and qualified to  results.We highly recommend that you work with a counselor who is trained and qualified ta
administer and interpret career and personality assessments. However, if it is not possible to  administer and interpret career and personality assessments. However,if it is not possible to
do so, we have listed some resources that are available to the public*. Results from these  do so,we have listed some resources that are available to the public*.Results from these
assessments change at different times in your life. It is important to have fresh results before  assessments change at different times in your life. It is important to have fresh results before
beginning this template, even if you have done tests before. Once you have gathered your results,  beginning this template,even if you have done tests before.Once you have gathered your results
we suggest following the sequence below.  we suggest following the sequence below.
Personality Style: Using your results from the MBTI® or other personality assessment, write  1.Personality StyleUsing your results from the MBTIor other personality assessment,write
down your personality style in this area. Next, look up the explanations of your personality type  down your personality style in this area.Next,look up the explanations of your personality type
and record key words and phrases that you feel are the most meaningful to you.  and record key words and phrases that you feel are the most meaningful to you.
Commonly used assessment: Myers-Briggs Type Indicator(MBTI) Commonly used assessment: Myers-Briggs Type Indicator® (MBTI) 
Public resources: The Keirsey Temperament Sorter* II: http://keirsey.com Public resources: The Keirsey Temperament Sorter® II: http://keirsey.com  
Paul D.Tieger and Barbara Barron,Do What You Are:Discover the Perfect Career for You Through the Paul D. Tieger and Barbara Barron, Do What You Are: Discover the Perfect Career for You Through the 
Secrets of Personality Type,4th ed.Little,Brown &Co.,2007 Secrets of Personality Type, (4th ed. Little, Brown & Co., 2007). 
Isabel Briggs Myers.Gifts Differing:Understanding Personality Type.Davies-Black Publishing.1995 Isabel Briggs Myers, Gifts Differing: Understanding Personality Type, (Davies-Black Publishing, 1995). 
David Keirsey and Marilyn Bates, Please Understand Me: Character & Temperament Types, (5th ed.  David Keirsey and Marilyn Bates,Please Understand Me:Character & Temperament Types,(5th ed.
Prometheus Nemesis Book Company,1984. Prometheus Nemesis Book Company, 1984). 
Interests: Using the results from an interest assessment, write down your one-, two-, or  2 Interests: Using the results from an interest assessment,write down your one-,two-or
three-letter theme code or your general family of interests. For example, if your assessment  three-letter theme code or your general family of interests.For example,if your assessment
indicates that you are Enterprising, Social, and Artistic, you would write those three words in  indicates that you are Enterprising,Social,and Artistic,you would write those three words in
the area provided for Interests. After reading the descriptions from your report or workbook,  the area provided for Interests.After reading the descriptions from your report or workbook,
add words or phrases to the template that are relevant to you.  add words or phrases to the template that are relevant to you.
Commonly used assessment: Strong Interest Inventory (Strong) Commonly used assessment: Strong Interest Inventory® (Strong) 
Public resources:Self-Directed Search by Dr.John Hollandhttp//www.self-directed-search.com Public resources: Self-Directed Search by Dr. John Holland: http://www.self-directed-search.com/ 
Career Interests Game:http://career.missouri.edu/students/explore/thecareerinterestsgame.php Career Interests Game: http://career.missouri.edu/students/explore/thecareerinterestsgame.php  
Values: Using a values card sort or list of values, identify the top ten values that are  3. Values:Using a values card sort or list of values,identify the top ten values that are
meaningful to you at this point in time. After writing down your top ten values, write a definition  meaningful to you at this point in time. After writing down your top ten values,write a definition
for each. Rather than going to the dictionary,ask yourself,"How does this value show up in my for each. Rather than going to the dictionary, ask yourself, "How does this value show up in my 
life? What does this mean to me?" life? What does this mean to me?" 
Commonly used assessment:Values-Driven Work Card Sort by NOVA,Knowdell Career Values Card Sort Commonly used assessment: Values-Driven Work -  Card Sort by NOVA, Knowdell Career Values Card Sort 
Public resources:Quintessential Careershttp://www.quintcareers.com/workplace_values.html Public resources: Quintessential Careers: http://www.quintc ,-. Jrs.com/workplace_values.html  
Selfcounseling.com:http://www.selfcounseling.com/help/personalsuccess/personalvalues.html Selfcounseling.com:  http://www.selfcounseling.com/help/personalsuccess/personalvalues.html  
* An Internet search for career assessments will provide you with many resources.Take care that many online* An Internet search for career assessments will provide you with many resources. Take care that many online 
assessments or quizzes are not scientifically valid or reliable and may not provide you with accurate information. assessments or quizzes are not scientifically valid or reliable and may not provide you with accurate information. 
It is advisable to work with a career counselor who is qualified or certified to administer assessments. It is advisable to work with a career counselor who is qualified or certified to administer assessments. 
C2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL 0 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONA 
• 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS' 	 VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS
The Career Compass The Career Compass 
Skills & Strengths: Use this area to capture the skills and strengths that you currently have  4. 
4.Skills & Strengths: Use this area to capture the skills and strengths that you currently have
and would like to use in the future. You may also include skills you'd like to develop in the future.  and would like to use in the future. You may also include skills you'd like to develop in the future
Commonly used assessments: SkillScan, Knowdell Motivated Skills Card Sort, EUREKA's Motivated Skill Sort  Commonly used assessments:SkillScan,Knowdell Motivated Skills Card Sort,EUREKA's Motivated Skill Sort
Public resources: Authentic Happiness, hosted by Dr. Martin Seligman at University of Pennsylvania:  Public resourcesAuthentic Happiness,hosted by Dr. Martin Seligman at University of Pennsylvania
http://www.authentichappiness.sas.upenn.edu/Default.aspx   http://www.authentichappiness.sas.upenin.edu/Default.aspx
0*NET: http://online.onetcenter.org/skills/   O*NEThttp//online.onetcenter.org/skills/
StrengthsQuesem: https://www.strengthsquest.com   StrengthsQuestTM.https://www.strengthsquest.com
Marcus Buckingham and Donald CliftonNow,Discover Your Strengths,Free Press,2001 Marcus Buckingham and Donald Clifton, Now, Discover Your Strengths, (Free Press, 2001). 
Tom Rath, StrengthsFinder 2.0: A New and Upgraded Edition of the Online Test From Gallup's Now,  Tom Rath.StrengthsFinder 2.O:A New and Upgraded Eaition of the Online Test From Gallup's Now
Discover Your Strengths, (Gallup Press, 2007).  Discover Your Strengths,(Gallup Press,2007
Job Families: Before you consider specific occupations, write down broad job families that  5. 
5.Job Families: Before you consider specific occupations.write down broad job families that
interest you, or job families that appeared in the personality, interest, values, skills and/or  interest you,or job families that appeared in the personality,interest,values,skills and/or
strengths assessments results. Job families are groups of occupations that share similar  strengths assessments results.Job families are groups of occupations that share similar
skills, training and credentials. 0*NET allows you to look at several job families and their  skills,training and credentials.O*NET allows you to look at several job families and their
corresponding occupations. Record your top four or five on the job family "arc," allowing plenty  Cortorrrrrrortootrrtrnrrrrrrrnrrrrrrnrrporttnrrrnornnnrrrerrrroory
of space in between them.  of space in between them.
Commonly used assessmentMBTI Career Report Commonly used assessment: MBTI Career Report 
Public resourceO*NET:http//online.onetcenter.org Public resource: 0*NET:  http://online.onetcenter.org  
Occupations: From the Strong, MBTI, O*NET, or based on work with your counselor, write  6. 
Occupations:From the Strong,MBTI.O*NET,or based on work with your counselor,write 6.
down the top eight occupations that correspond to your personality and/or interests. Some of  down the top eight occupations that correspond to your personality and/or interests.Some of
these occupations may not appeal to you at the moment. However, after further research you  these occupations may not appeal to you at the moment.However,after further research you
may find that you have things in common with people who enjoy that work. You can eliminate  may find that you have things in common with people who enjoy that work.You can eliminate
occupations that aren't a good fit for you later. Record these occupations near the appropriate  occupations that aren't a good fit for you later. Record these occupations near the appropriate
job family.  job family.
Commonly used assessment:MBTI Career Report,Strong Commonly used assessment: MBTI Career Report, Strong 
Public resource:O*NET:http//online.onetcenter.org Public resource: 0*NET: http://online.onetcenter.org  
Personal Statement: This area of the template allows you to summarize the information you 
7.  7
Personal Statement: This area of the template allows you to summarize the information you
have collected through all of your assessments and discussion with your counselor. Begin  have collected through all of your assessments and discussion with your counselor. Begir
by writing down three to four words that express the essence of who you are. You may find  by writing down three to four words that express the essence of who you are.You may find
these words among the summaries you have written down for your personality style, interests,  these words among the summaries you have written down for your personality style, interests
values and skills. Look for common themes in your assessment results. Next, brainstorm  values and skills.Look for common themes in your assessment results. Next,brainstorm
different ways of putting these words together to create a phrase that you could use to tell  different ways of putting these words together to create a phrase that you could use to tell
someone about yourself. This might also be used as an "elevator speech" or thirty-second  someone about yourself.This might also be used as an "elevator speechor thirty-second
commercial. Your statement may complete the sentence: "I am motivated by . . . " Or, you  commercial.Your statement may complete the sentence:I am motivated by..Or,you
may want to consider how you would answer the following questions: "What gives me a sense  may want to consider how you would answer the following questions:"What gives me a sense
of purpose?" "How do I want to make a difference through work?" You may want to start by  of purpose?"How do I want to make a difference through work?"You may want to start by
listing bullets on a separate sheet of paper, then craft your sentence in several different ways  listing bullets on a separate sheet of paper then craft your sentence in several different ways
before transferring your final statement to the template.  before transferring your final statement to the template.
Your completed Preferences & Possibilities template is a valuable tool in the career process. On  Your completed Preferences & Possibilities template is a valuable tool in the career process.On
one page, you should have a clear picture of who you are and several career directions to explore.  one page,you should have a clear picture of who you are and several career directions to explore
Use the "Notes" page following the template to capture any additional observations or thoughts.  Use the "Notes"page following the template to capture any additional observations or thoughts
© 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALVt 	 2009THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL
27 27 
START  START
HERE  HERE
28 	 28
The Career Compass 	 The Career Compass
Sample Answers for Preferences & Possibilities:  Sample Answers for Preferences & Possibilities:
PERSONAL  PERSONAL
7
STATEMENT:  STATEMENT:
I am motivated by  I am motivated by
working with people  working with people
to solve complex  to solve complex
problems, honestly  problems,honestly
and creatively, while  and creatively,while
making time for my  making time for my
life outside of work.  life outside of work.
OCCUPATIONS:  OCCUPATIONS:
6.
human resources  human resources
manager, training  manager,training
specialist,  specialist,
marketing manager,  marketing manager
teacher, fund-raiser,  teacher,fund-raiser
writer, journalist.  writer,journalist
REFERENCES & 
TCREFERENCES &PCSSIBILITIES
• 
• 
PERSONALITY PERSONAL 
STYLE
JOB FAMILIES:  5
JOB FAMILIES Business and  Business and
Financial Operations,  Financial Operations,
Management,  Management,
Community and  Community and
Social Services,  Social Services,
Communication, Communication, 
Business/Consulting.  Business/Consulting
OCCUPRTION OBFAML JOB FAMILIES 
PERSONAL STATEMENT  PERSONALSTATEMENT
USKLLS*SKILLS • 
STRENGTHS STRENGTHS 
INTERESTS• 
INTERESTS
PERSONALITY STYLE:  PERSONALITY STYLE
Extroverted: I prefer working  Extroverted:I prefer working
with groups. Intuitive: I see  with groups.Intuitive:I see
the big picture. Feeling: I care  the big picture.Feeling:I care
about how my decisions affect  about how my decisions affect
other people. I like harmony.  other people.I like harmony
Judging: I like structure and  Judging:I like structure and
like to plan ahead.  like to plan ahead
SVALUES•ALUES 
INTERESTS:Social:helping 2. INTERESTS: Social: helping,  2
healing, supportive.  healing,supportive.
Enterprising: leadership,  Enterprising:leadership
persuading. Artistic: creative,  persuading.Artistic:creative,
original, independent.  original, independent
A completed template might look like this:  A completed template might look like this
TPREFERENCES &POSSIBILITIES
PREFERENCES & POSSIBILITIES 
• OCCUPATIONS  OCCUPATIONS
ov Tander*AI Tam*, 
 
Fsorae• ef"-
fi 
GChAs
bryic De ehts
Crto
CoorSets
L7mil tit 
3 F
C
3
Zr 
B
• 1**v-J  „c•ra‘a 
,•••••  W
JOBFAMILIES• 
JOB FAMILIES 
Huope Tominm
al Ca Rm-  e Pcm
4 Sa,..ce  4 Serwce
STATEMENT
• 
PERSONAL STATEMENT  PPERSONAI
l0
14. .4 avg. frcl  S in a S4a1,4ap4-a 4.e 
Cymtmr#,I=PI 
a
usinq 01 4 04.1 day,  Solve p-.444,r  
vhCn
of•• 414,2d 7S440,7 
r in
Ngma
Tishary
PERSONALIT• 
PERSONALITY 
STYLE STYLE 
I... 	
SINTERESTS*INTERESTS 
Atartote, 4,1111011i • ..›.......,... . zaf4.45.." 
\ • "....-t  eartaols
.41 ae.44.,  Ca
S:
Socea 6 - ; SOCIA I 
.n
C
haga
I+Trestisahve
Ave 
STNUfr 
othton
sO
C
orhre
atyzg
GVALUES-  yALLI ES 
Tone Ther der
C
4
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 
SKILLS & SKILLS & 
STRENGTHS:  STRENGTHS:
Listening, being  Listening,being
open-minded,  open-minded,
generating ideas,  generating ideas,
conceptualizing, conceptualizing, 
teaching, and  teaching, and
counseling. counseling. 
3 VALUES: Honesty and  3.VALUES:Honesty and
Integrity: Need a setting  Integrity: Need a setting
where these are valued. Help  where these are valued.Help
Others: Either individually or  Others:Either individually or
in small groups. Challenging  in small groups.Challenging
Problems: Like to solve  Problems: Like to solve
complex questions. Work/life  complex questions.Work/life
Balance: Need time for family,  Balance: Need time for family
hobbies, and myself.  hobbies,and myself.
KO gm* CPI I 
o g.i
Paialwr  ccZ 
9SKILLS*SPILLS • 
STRENGTHS STRENGTHS 
Ct
psyonlagist
Spoeck• 4.,vc-4 
pe4d.,st  Gnred
ON
• Art 4 mclt" 
Pupkshilk
skas 
05,  K
Orgnis
sell, • 
Contr
C$a•••":"—•••
', ....eite 
+hded
ps
hcs
 edr b aroffve• C'ffj"1.--r o4a- 4 4-soa.,C 
ib sD
7
rng-.0r,aava- a 
I Peed,.  Reoy
• AcAcm.4.1-- 	
As 
Ach
Teh.
\ZI,  
dsK  yusngI• .T/S.TRT/14.,  Pe• ATZ:Z4. 
O
2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL © 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALV7 
The Career Compass  PREFERENCES & POSSIBILITIES  The Career Compass PREFERENCES & POSSIBILITIES
• 
L., OCCUPATIONS 
OCCUPATIONS JOB FAMILIES  JOB FAMILIES
ammmiow 
011114"-''- 	
L., PERSONAL STATEMENT 
PERSONAL STATEMENT
L., PERSONALITY  PERSONALITY
STYLE  STYLE
INTERESTS
L.., VALUES  VALUES
SKILLS &  SKILLS &
STRENGTHS  STRENGTHSL
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 	 VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS
Notes:  Notes
THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALV 	 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL
The Career Compass  The Career Compass
31 31 
• 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 	
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS Stage 4  Stage 4
WORK/LIFE WHEEL  WORK/LIFE WHEEL
The Career Compass  The Career Compass
With the big picture of your Preferences & Possibilities defined, you may have  With the big picture of your Preferences & Possibilities defined,you may have
begun to imagine a different future. In the Work/Life Wheel, you will craft your  begun to imagine a different future.In the Work/Life Wheel,you will craft your
most satisfying life. Consider not only what type of work situation would be  most satisfying life. Consider not only what type of work situation would be
ideal for you, but imagine what an optimal life outside of work might look like.  ideal for you, but imagine what an optimal life outside of work might look like
Articulating your wishes for the future will help you define your direction.  Articulating your wishes for the future will help you define your direction.
With your work/life dream described, you can compare your wishes with your  With your work/life dream described,you can compare your wishes with your
reality. This comparison, or gap analysis, will highlight areas of satisfaction  reality. This comparison, or gap analysis, will highlight areas of satisfaction
and areas that need improvement. The result will be a clearer understanding  and areas that need improvement. The result will be a clearer understanding
of the priorities you want to set as you move forward.  of the priorities you want to set as you move forward.
WORK/LIFE WHEEL
 O Euu
Without leaps of imagination, or  Without leaps of imagination,or
dreaming, we lose the excitement of  dreaming, we lose the excitement of
possibilities. Dreaming, after all, is a  possibilities. Dreaming, after all, is a
form of planning.  form of planning
Gloria Steinem Gloria Steinem 
200 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALV © 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALVP 
33 33 
•  y  / Mel .  I  WORK/LIFE WHEEL
34 	 34
The Career Compass 	 The Career Compass
WORK/LIFE WHEEL  WORK/LIFE WHEEL
VISUALPLANNING SYSTEMS VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 
Assess Your Life and Set Priorities  Assess Your Life and Set Priorities
The Work/Life Wheel template helps you consider the many aspects of your life and set priorities  The Work/Life Wheel template helps you consider the many aspects of your life and set priorities
as you move forward. Work/Life Wheel first asks you to imagine every part of your life in a future,  as you move forward.Work/Life Wheel first asks you to imagine every part of your life in a future
preferred state. Next you are asked to assess your current situation and identify the areas where  preferred state. Next you are asked to assess your current situation and identify the areas where
you feel most fulfilled, and those that could improve. The self-awareness gained from this exercise  you feel most fulfilled,and those that could improve.The self-awareness gained from this exercise
helps you determine where to focus in the next stage of life and career.  helps you determine where to focus in the next stage of life and career.
STEPS  STEPS
Allow yourself to think about your life through different lenses for this exercise. You'll begin by  Allow yourself to think about your life through different lenses for this exercise.You'll begin by
brainstorming future possibilities (in the outer ring), which requires an open-minded approach.  brainstorming future possibilities (in the outer ring),which requires an open-minded approach.
Then, as you assess your current life (in the inner ring), you will need to be objective. Finally, as  Then,as you assess your current life in the inner ringyou will need to be objective.Finally,as
you set priorities, be focused and realistic.  you set priorities,be focused and realistic.
Future Date: Date the template by choosing a time far enough in the future to stretch your  1. Future Date:Date the template by choosing a time far enough in the future to stretch your
thinking, but not so far that you can't visualize your life at that point. Your future date could  thinking,but not so far that you can't visualize your life at that point. Your future date could
take place anytime between six months and five years from today.  take place anytime between six months and five years from today.
Wishes for the Future: Begin by reviewing the categories on the outer ring of the template. 
2. Wishes for the Future: Begin by reviewing the categories on the outer ring of the template
The template is organized with the left side designated At Work" and the right side "Outside  The template is organized with the left side designated "At Work" and the right side "Outside
of Work," with the categories of Health and Wealth bridging both sides. Fill in the outer ring  of Work,"with the categories of Health and Wealth bridging both sides. Fill in the outer ring
using the order suggested below, or start where you have the clearest wishes for your future.  using the order suggested below,or start where you have the clearest wishes for your future
In this initial part of the exercise, free yourself from the constraints of today and focus your  In this initial part of the exercise,free yourself from the constraints of today and focus your
attention on the days ahead. Open up your thinking—imagine possibilities you may not have  attention on the days ahead. Open up your thinking-imagine possibilities you may not have
allowed yourself to envision before. Your completed Preferences & Possibilities may be a  allowed yourself to envision before.Your completed Preferences & Possibilities may be a
helpful reference for this exercise.  helpful reference for this exercise.
Health: Imagine yourself in excellent health. What would you be doing to take care of  2a. Health:Imagine yourself in excellent health.What would you be doing to take care of
yourself? You may consider physical fitness,sleep,food choices,stress levels,mental yourself? You may consider physical fitness, sleep, food choices, stress levels, mental 
health, and so forth.  health, and so forth.
The Work I Do: What would you love to be paid to do? If you could craft your own job  2b.The Work I Do:What would you love to be paid to do? If you could craft your own job
description, what would it be? What kinds of things would you do in a day's work?  description, what would it be? What kinds of things would you do in a day's work?
Professional Growth: Imagine that you have been progressing in your career. Are there  2c.Professional Growth Imagine that you have been progressing in your career. Are there
new skills that you have learned? What have you accomplished? Are there hurdles that  new skills that you have learned? What have you accomplished? Are there hurdles that
you have overcome?  you have overcome?
Work Relationships: What do your ideal work relationships look like? Consider what 
2d.Work Relationships: What do your ideal work relationships look like? Consider what
type of boss, coworkers, associates and clients you would like to have. Would your work  type of boss,coworkers,associates and clients you would like to have.Would your work
relationships also include friendships?  relationships also include friendships?
Work Environment: What is your ideal work environment like? Are you alone or working  2e.Work Environment:What is your ideal work environment like? Are you alone or working
with a group of people? Are you in a small or large organization? Describe your imagined  with a group of people? Are you in a small or large organization? Describe your imagined
surroundings. surroundings. 
Fun Activities: What are you doing to have fun? Consider socializing, recreation and  2f. Fun Activities: What are you doing to have fun? Consider socializing,recreation and
leisure activities, travel, entertainment, and relaxation. Often items that come up under  leisure activities,travel,entertainment,and relaxation.Often items that come up under
Personal Growth may appear in this category, as well.  Personal Growth may appear in this category, as well.
Personal Growth: Personal Growth is defined by each individual. Are there classes you 
2g.Personal Growth:Personal Growth is defined by each individual.Are there classes you
want to take, a spiritual practice to develop, or a behavior or attitude change to work on?  want to take,a spiritual practice to develop,or a behavior or attitude change to work on?
Or perhaps you have intellectual or creative pursuits you want to cultivate. In your future  Or perhaps you have intellectual or creative pursuits you want to cultivate.In your future
state, what have you accomplished?  state,what have you accomplished
S 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALV C 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONACV(7 
• • • 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 	
The Career Compass 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS
The Career Compass
2h. Personal Relationships: Consider the different relationships you have with significant  2h.Personal Relationships: Consider the different relationships you have with significant
others, family members or friends. Also take into account relationships that you don't  others,family members or friends.Also take into account relationships that you don't
have now, but may in the future. Although there are variables out of your control, how  have now,but may in the future.Although there are variables out of your control,how
could you make your relationships as fulfilling as possible? Ultimately answer: What do  could you make your relationships as fulfilling as possible? Ultimately answer:What do
you want from your personal relationships and what would that look like?  you want from your personal relationships and what would that look like?
2i. Home Environment: If your home environment supported your well-being, what would  2i. Home Environment:If your home environment supported your well-being,what would
it be like? Would it be a completely different place, or your current home, but perhaps  it be like? Would it be a completely different place,or your current home,but perhaps
improved? Consider city or town, neighborhood, type of housing, your space, and the like.  improved? Consider city or town,neighborhood, type of housing,your space,and the like.
Describe your surroundings.  Describe your surroundings.
2j. Wealth: Research has shown that money and happiness have a complicated relationship.  2j. Wealth:Research has shown that money and happiness have a complicated relationship.
Look over the other categories on the template and think about what is fulfilling for you.  Look over the other categories on the template and think about what is fulfilling for you.
Now fill in the sentences: I need enough money to . . . I want enough money to . . .  Now fill in the sentences:I need enough money to..I want enough money to.
Current Satisfaction Levels: Now, with an objective but not overly critical mind set, begin to  3. Current Satisfaction Levels:Now,with an objective but not overly critical mind set,begin to
rate how you feel about each area of your life right now. Draw a line from the center outward to  rate how you feel about each area of your life right now.Draw a line from the center outward to
reflect your level of satisfaction on a scale of 1 to 10. One would be completely unsatisfied, 5  reflect your level of satisfaction on a scale of 1 to 10.One would be completely unsatisfied,5
would be moderately satisfied, and 10 would be completely satisfied. Once you draw your line,  would be moderately satisfied,and 10 would be completely satisfied.Once you draw your line
you can shade each section if you wish.  you can shade each section if you wish.
What's Working Right Now? Examine your current satisfaction levels and note the areas of  4. What's Working Right Now? Examine your current satisfaction levels and note the areas of
your life that are most satisfying.  your life that are most satisfying.
Where Are the Largest Gaps? Now, look at your current satisfaction levels versus your  5. Where Are the Largest Gaps? Now,look at your current satisfaction levels versus your
wishes for the future and note the largest gaps from now to the future state. Think of gaps as  wishes for the future and note the largest gaps from now to the future state.Think of gaps as
opportunities for change.  opportunities for change.
Insights/Ideas: Noting your gaps, is there anything you uncovered about yourself that you  6.Insights/ldeas:Noting your gaps,is there anything you uncovered about yourself that you
previously did not know or had not articulated? Do you have ideas about how to lessen  previously did not know or had not articulated? Do you have ideas about how to lessen
the gaps? Consider what you may have learned in the Preferences & Possibilities exercise.  the gaps? Consider what you may have learned in the Preferences & Possibilities exercise.
Does knowledge about your personal traits shed any new light on areas of satisfaction or  Does knowledge about your personal traits shed any new light on areas of satisfaction or
dissatisfaction?  dissatisfaction?
Priorities: As a final step, choose your top three to five priorities for the next stage of your  7. Priorities:As a final step,choose your top three to five priorities for the next stage of your
life. It is very difficult to have complete satisfaction in every aspect of our lives at any given  life.It is very difficult to have complete satisfaction in every aspect of our lives at any given
time. It can, in fact, make us unhappy trying to succeed in all areas. Think about where you  time.It can,in fact,make us unhappy trying to succeed in all areas. Think about where you
want to focus your attention and where you will give yourself a break for this time period. Look  want to focus your attention and where you will give yourself a break for this time period. Look
back at your Insights/Ideas section—sometimes a hidden priority can show up as an insight.  back at your Insights/ldeas section--sometimes a hidden priority can show up as an insight.
Your completed Work/Life Wheel gives you a comprehensive picture of what is most important  Your completed Work/Life Wheel gives you a comprehensive picture of what is most important
to you, in both your life at work and your life outside of work. The priorities you have set should  to you, in both your life at work and your life outside of work.The priorities you have set should
provide a focused lens as you advance into research and decision-making.  provide a focused lens as you advance into research and decision-making
Use the "Notes" page following the template to capture any additional observations or thoughts.  Use the "Notes"page following the template to capture any additional observations or thoughts.
2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL...V(7-  D 2OO9 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL
35 35 
START  START
HERE  HERE
36 	 36
The Career Compass The Career Compass 
Sample Answers for Work/Life Wheel:  Sample Answers for Work/Life Wheel
FUTURE DATE:
FUTURE DATE: 	
HEALTH:  2A.HEALTH
Feel strong.
By my 30th 	Feel strong, 
By my 30th birthday.
healthy.Stress
birthday. 
healthy. Stress  levels down.  levels down.
Overcome Overcome 
insomnia.  insomnia.
WORK ENV'T:  2EWORK ENV'T
Team-oriented,  Team-oriented.
balance of  balance of
casual and  casual and
professional.  professional.
2F.  FUN ACTIVITIES:  2F.FUN ACTIVITIES
Time with  Time with
friends, music, friends, music, 
seeing art,  seeing art,
travel abroad.  travel abroad.
lh Career Comps.  WORK/LIFE WHEEL   cC WORK/LIFE WHEEL
• 
Whet% Mel.,  AO. MOW, 
• 1":17.  e where
NORMOY
2  WEALTH: 	4. 
WHAT'S 
2J.WEALTH
4.WHAT'S
Need enough Need enough 
money to cover  money to cover
expenses and  expenses and
have some  have some
fun.Save for a fun. Save for a 
house. house. 
2C 2D
WORKING  WORKING
RIGHT NOW?:  RIGHT NOW?
Artistic  Artistic
development,  development,
social life,  social life
traveling. traveling. 
be 2B 2E
THE WORK I  2B.THE WORK
DO:Creative DO: Creative 
work, using  work.using
intellectual  intellectual
and artistic  and artistic
skills.  skills.
2G.PERSONAL
PERSONAL  GROWTH:  GROWTH:
Improved  Improved
painting and painting and 
drawing skills.  drawing skills.
WISHES FOR THEFUTUNE WISHES FOR THE FUTURE 
 e 2A.  2A
sewarewe a.„ 
3
CURRENT  CURRENT
2F.
PROFESSIONAL 
2C.PROFESSIONAL
GROWTH:  GROWTH:
Creating and Creating and 
managing my  managing my
own projects. A  own projects.A
leader at work.  leader at work.
PERSONAL  2H.PERSONAL
RELATIONSHIPS: RELATIONSHIPS: 
Spending quality  Spending quality
time with my time with my 
parents, siblings. parents, siblings. 
FUTURE DATE
a Peio
2G.
SATISFACTION  SATISFACTION
LEVELS: Rate 	 LEVELS:Rate
each area each area 
accordingly.  accordingly
2 2J. 
@ weah Wealth •
5.  WHERE ARE  5
WHERE ARE THE LARGEST  THE LARGEST
2
GAPS?: Current  GAPS?:Current
job doesn't  job doesn't
suit me, work  suit me.work
relationships  relationships
are poor.  are poor.
A completed template might look like this:  A completed template might look like this:
TheCCWORK/LIFE WHEEL
WORK/LIFE WHEEL 
whers working• whom working 
tight new? right newt 
+P2SouL• Pprgs•/•4 
RELATIONSHIPS get.4-00mS00/P5 
IDSFF
• 
Kiln ofF  T scHoL 7• SP&MC_  iSSROUS--511CC.563 
O where
Where 
• 
are thg
are the  lagt Wage"  aT
8HeALTH• 4IeACTN 
MONEY No/der' 
*RK
0  
b
• /AtAK 
ENVIRONMENT OuviRavetemr 
 PoRSANA L• *..,eSoNif 
Cf6.711  GROVIH
 PEOFESCIONAL• FroteSvavAL 
GEINTH Gg•A774 
• 
.HAVE HAVE 
• 
De Oe 
+HELPING• KeLPIAI6   PPLE mAKE Peoft• nsAer• 
WISHES FOR THE FUTURE WISHES FOR THE FUTURE 
OHeath Health • 
IIT SNG
. .1, 14OHlt SmoKiNG  I'M RLKIN
KKLK , K4   AINRRE TINES• -Kew 'TIMES 
A weAuc  A veek.
INANCIAL DECISI
fooAJUAL • vecA, ∎AlICT)  PLEGOTIATION
mL ONauY 0 001E400 -Too 
PEOFSSIALSES
PRoPoSS00I411. %au  HAVECREATED• HAVO clz•mr0  A NW MCHE
 
S! A 
P IE/ E
U
PL WYELF
L
YE e
F 	
fA  E.
HAVPECT•AAvc c
esoe F(
T 
 f 
INTHEIUDUSTZY IN TOW eDegreY 
lal
   
FEINDLY YT.csiemt.y 
PRIFESGONAL*171.665640L*1.- 
2*-ActooSHIPS  ROLATIONSHIPS
wn4 cowcA66S  WITH COLLEAGES
a WoRKiN6 11. •uARK.N6 
KHRERNBE wceggi,ogura. 
Home ORME 
OFFILE OFFICE 
-Convert a-C.A.AvAef 
01,, Id's   Okitd's
o,o,  Dedr aom
MANAGE MANIAC'S 
6.
@FM
naWIL
2H
OUTSIDE
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 
WORK  2D.WORK
RELATIONSHIPS: RELATIONSHIPS: 
Friendly boss,  Friendly boss,
coworkers,  coworkers,
clients.Less clients. Less 
conflict.  conflict.
21.HOME
HOME 
ENVIRONMENT:  ENVIRONMENT:
Better art. Better art-
making space.  making space.
•  1:si•her  O intights/
OFWO
INSIGHTS/IDEAS:  INSIGHTS/IDEAS:
Haven't been  Haven't been
considering considering 
professional  professional
growth nearly  growth nearly
enough. Work  enough.Work
affects health.  affects health.
7
PRIORITIES:  PRIORITIES:
Get a creative  Get a creative
job where I  job where I
can grow, in  can growin
an upbeat,  an upbeat,
friendly friendly 
organization.  organization.
mum DAITC 00• V•Ki FOowlsofh,   FUTURE DATEO AFY
Prioritie• Pr.". 
BeSTK/
ONTTAK EVYTH.1001 Ate EINCYTHKI6 
so pets•kALLY  SO PEPSLLLY
REJYVENATED Re310161,Art 
LATIONSHIP wITH ULA-ROMSHIP WITH •
LL A my RIFE NOW 11441" '1H# KIDS *25 upt.e. • SHREWIIN6 kr LOG •  PZTN6 HELIFE.AVEFOLIATIM&   .  GuiLLNERN TRAUSTION.
APYPELIATING MY cuLDRen
.ADEST tEEY 	T 
REPC' 
CHLDS 2m
CAHL.05 Room  CONVERTED EamveRrEO  T0 OFFICE-ED OfFiCe 
I WANT ENOGH MEY WANT Ef001444 •ocxY 
TAKE mV woe To tola. • • 
@ weaith
aie wealth 	
AS ADULTS
AS ADw-TS/ 
• Ti•e 5 , 51 
MYWFED HH WIFE 4 Fig ,  
• soLF 
.GOLF
6NGT
-No 
K2ecs Kele, • 
Ewc.K., 
T
-rseAlsre .-reAva.  THSA6R
TEAVGL
sh-
nw Haon
euo.C.,e4  D PMT MY?KT MY  SO SIDS 76,44644 
COLLACE. pu,666. 
r•Choe 
daa I
moD 
CO coolcwe 
OEUERTAWUK
SVILUNTEER  oLLOKTErdt  lf 
TTORNG AT Y. HEA4 X0001.-  SCO
TTING OTHE
.earrouc, wee  SADNES CCTe
-1-Nt 
SADAREE, A 
I BBN6 GONE
.ry.sr Nome/  ETLP T ger l*1.P 7p P.r  OS  C Kg's 7Flenr6N CAui6E 
NE OFFICE• 14.06 oFAIce 
QTSNOLNG gut r 5NY0KA-,6 
OUTSIDE
WO
@insights/
Ideas Nem 
An41,8e  Y8E
MY WIFE rY 0.0FE 
CouLD Go COW. P GO 
Mee -I use.K.  MKMe
PBILL SAE.0L4 SALO 
.4 
ACHNK Or hwrY ay MOIMY 
MU6 oFICE 1.44/05 •FF,CO 
Mary  wne
UTHSTWE F• IP 714iS TIME of 
TANSITINI
	Z 
7XAMSt 
REALLY NEED TO•10400.0" A.66P 
lcoljtg &•D NEON&  RACH BUOPESe
MOENG NOTHELPIG
oL,G. A.1" AILLAAO 
one le•,c ud 01,10, 	 4110,1•4I 
2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL C 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALVr 
   
 
 
 
The Career Compass  WORK/LIF EE WHEEL 	 The Career Compass WORK/LIFE WHEEL
WISHES FOR THE FUTURE
WISHES FOR THE FUTURE 	
L., Health  Health
L., What's working 
What's working
right now?  right now?
AT WORK
IP  Where 	 Where
O 
are the  are the
largest  largest
gaps?  gaps?
Growth Professional
Work Relationships
Work I Do\ 0 
440'(\k 
 
The.cx`e   
CURENT ATISACTON EVEL
S AT I S FA CTIO N L ifk-4  
Fun Activities L_ put?  
fr/t/ 
  04, 
FUTURE DATE: 	 FUTURE DATE:
Personal 0 
Growth Q 
O  fi 
OutSIde of WorK)10044  do  3 0 1SO° 
Personal Relationships
L., Priorities 
Priorities
 
L Insights/  Insights/
Ideas  Ideas
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS . ' 	 VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS
Notes:  Notes:
0 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALV7 	 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL
The Career Compass  The Career Compass
3  39 
• 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 	
VISUAL PLANNNG SYSTEMS Stage 5  Stage 5
CHOICES IN CONTEXT  CHOICES IN CONTEXT
The Career Compass The Career Compass 
Up to this point in The Career Compass process, you have primarily focused  Up to this point in The Career Compass process,you have primarily focused
your thinking internally. Your History combined with your Preferences &  your thinking internally.Your History combined with your Preferences &
Possibilities developed a picture of who you are. The Work/Life Wheel helped  Possibilities developed a picture of who you are.The Work/Life Wheel helped
clarify your work and life wishes, and helped set priorities for moving forward.  clarify your work and life wishes, and helped set priorities for moving forward
These exercises have built on one another to provide a solid foundation for  These exercises have built on one another to provide a solid foundation for
the work ahead.  the work ahead.
In the next phase of The Career Compass, the focus shifts to the external  In the next phase of The Career Compass, the focus shifts to the external
environment. With Choices in Context, you begin researching different career  environment.With Choices in Context,you begin researching different career
opportunities. You will cast a wide net, and then work on refining your options  opportunities. You will cast a wide net,and then work on refining your options
as you compare different occupations. Choices in Context will help you  as you compare different occupations.Choices in Context wili help you
consider the context within which occupations relate to the larger job market  Ctnrtttrertirtettnretttoterrrretrntiertrreeereeeittrrntterterrrrr
and ultimately how occupations relate to you.  and ultimately how occupations relate to you.
CHOICES IN CONTEXT CHOICES IN CONTEXT 
• Does n.n Me • ,,Z"""' 
 ,>-4.71Ya
l,-.2"'7:.*14144*Li44-4 
10B FAMI, 
OCCUPATION   
	
I 	 4 
In the long run, we shape our lives,  In the long run, we shape our lives
and we shape ourselves. The process  and we shape ourselves.The process
	
never ends until we die. And the choices  never ends until we die. And the choices
we make are ultimately our own  we make are ultimately our own
responsibility.  responsibility
Eleanor Roosevelt  Eleanor Roosevelt
© 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONA 	 2009THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL
41 
IrtitUroNIZISttfolDREC   
CHOICES IN CONTEX
42 	 42
The Career Compass 	 The Career Compass
CHOICES IN CONTEXT  CHOICES IN CONTEXT
VSAL PLANNING SYSTES VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 
Investigate Your Prospects  Investigate Your Prospects
The Choices in Context template helps you compare occupations and eventually focus your career  The Choices in Context template helps you compare occupations and eventually focus your career
prospects. It helps you look at different levels of information: the occupation itself, the larger  prospects.It helps you look at different levels of information:the occupation itself,the larger
context of employment trends, and whether or not the occupation fits you personally. The template  context of employment trends,and whether or not the occupation fits you personally.The template
is designed to compare three occupations per template. Use additional Choices in Context  is designed to compare three occupations per template.Use additional Choices in Context
templates (located in the Appendix) to look at additional job families and occupations.  templates (located in the Appendix)to look at additional job families and occupations
STEPS  STEPS
By completing the Preferences & Possibilities template, you should have a number of job families  By completing the Preferences & Possibilities template,you should have a number of job families
and occupations to research. For this template, you will be doing research online; reading books,  and occupations to research.For this template,you will be doing research online;reading books
magazines and newspapers; and having conversations with individuals in selected occupations.  magazines and newspapers; and having conversations with individuals in selected occupations.
If you know someone working in a field or occupation that interests you, take the time to read  If you know someone working in a field or occupation that interests you,take the time to read
through the instructions for the Networking Map (page 50). We recommend you start tracking  through the instructions for the Networking Map(page 50.We recommend you start tracking
names on the Networking Map as soon as you begin contacting people.  names on the Networking Map as soon as you begin contacting people.
Choices in Context works well with the Occupational Informational Network (0*NET), which was  Choices in Context works well with the Occupational Informational Network (O*NET),which was
developed for the United States Department of Labor and can be found online at  http://online.  developed for the United States Department of Labor and can be found online at http://online.
onetcenter.org .  Use 0*NET, or other job search website, and follow the sequence below.  onetcenter.org.Use O*NET,or other job search website,and follow the seguence below
Job Family: Look back at your Preferences & Possibilities template and select a job family  1. 
1. Job Family:Look back at your Preferences & Possibilities template and select a job family
that you would like to explore. To reiterate, a job family is a group of occupations that share  that you would like to explore.To reiterate,a job family is a group of occupations that share
similar skills, training and credentials. Write a job family in the center of the template, for  similar skills,training and credentials.Write a job family in the center of the template,for
example: "Business and Financial Operations" or "Administrative Support." 0*NET has a  example:"Business and Financial Operations"or "Administrative Support."O*NET has a
comprehensive list of job families.  comprehensive list of job families.
Occupations: Again, look back at your Preference & Possibilities template and transfer three  2. 
Occupations:Again,look back at your Preference & Possibilities template and transfer three 2
occupations that correspond to your chosen job family, one for each column. For example,  occupations that correspond to your chosen job family,one for each column.For example
if your job family is "Healthcare Practitioners and Technical Occupations," then occupations  if your job family is "Healthcare Practitioners and Technical Occupations,then occupations
under that heading could be "Speech Pathologist," "Psychologist," and "Occupational  under that heading could be "Speech Pathologist,""Psychologist,"and"Occupational
Therapist." Often we choose job titles that are already familiar to us. This is a good  Therapist. Often we choose job titles that are already familiar to us.This is a good
opportunity to look at jobs that you don't know. Choose at least one specific job title that  opportunity to look at jobs that you don't know.Choose at least one specific job title that
is new to you. If you don't have three occupations for your chosen job family, use the free  is new to you.If you don't have three occupations for your chosen job family,use the free
columns to fill in related occupations you uncover through research. Or, you can note related  columns to fill in related occupations you uncover through research.Or,you can note related
occupations as you look up a particular job and use additional templates to research those if  occupations as you look up a particular job and use additional templates to research those if
need be.  need be.
Job Functions: Start by researching one occupation and summarizing its job title and tasks.  3. 
3.Job Functions: Start by researching one occupation and summarizing its job title and tasks.
Don't worry about getting all of the information down; just note words and phrases that outline  Don't worry about getting all of the information down;just note words and phrases that outline
the scope of the job. A good summary of the job function may be found on 0*NET's online  the scope of the job.A good summary of the job function may be found on O*NET's online
summary report for each occupation. You will find more information under "Work Activities."  summary report for each occupation. You will find more information under "Work Activities."
Remember to record information about various settings in which an occupation can be found.  Remember to record information about various settings in which an occupation can be found.
Skills/Education I Would Need: Some jobs require special training, education, internships,  Skills/Education I Would Need:Some jobs require special training,education,internships
4
certification or licensing. In some areas, higher education or work experience may be  certification or licensing.In some areas,higher education or work experience may be
necessary to compete with others in that market. Search on the Internet with the phrase:  necessary to compete with others in that market.Search on the Internet with the phrase:
"qualifications required for (occupation)." On 0*NET, search the sections titled "Knowledge" "qualifications required for(occupation."On O*NET,search the sections titled "Knowledge
and "Job Zone." Also on 0*NET, take a look at "Skills," "Abilities" and "Work Styles" and note  and "Job Zone.Also on O*NET,take a look at "Skills,""Abilitiesand "Work Styles"and note
areas to develop. Keep track of the highlights, rather than writing down every detail. Don't  areas to develop.Keep track of the highlights,rather than writing down every detail.Don't
worry if you don't currently have the skills or education you will need. This activity lets you see  worry if you don't currently have the skills or education you will need.This activity lets you see
what additional work is needed to be employable for that job.  what additional work is needed to be employable for that job
2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALV ©2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL-Vt 
• 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS- 	 VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS
The Career Compass The Career Compass 
Transferable Skills I Have: While investigating "Knowledge," "Skills," "Abilities" and "Work  5.Transferable Skills I Have:While investigatingKnowledge,""Skills,""Abilities"and"Work 5. 
Styles" on 0*NET, write down your current capabilities that match this occupation.  Styles"on O*NET,write down your current capabilities that match this occupation.
Salary Range: Using websites such as online.onetcenter.org , or www.salary.com , as well as 
6.  6.
Salary Range: Using websites such as online.onetcenter.org,or www.salary.com,as well as job ads found in periodicals, research the salary range and median salary for each occupation.  job ads found in periodicals,research the salary range and median salary for each occupation
Be sure to read the job description carefully to make sure you are writing down the correct  Be sure to read the job description carefully to make sure you are writing down the correct
range for the job. Also, pay attention to salary level and how it corresponds to experience.  range for the job.Also,pay attention to salary level and how it corresponds to experience
Employment Trends: Now that you've recorded details about the occupation, take your  7. 
7. Employment Trends:Now that you've recorded details about the occupation,take your
research to a higher level and investigate the occupation in the larger context of the job  research to a higher level and investigate the occupation in the larger context of the job
market. 0*NET provides data that indicates the job outlook for occupations on both the  market.O*NET provides data that indicates the iob outlook for occupations on both the
national and state levels in "Wages and Employment Trends." Is this profession growing,  national and state levels in Wages and Employment Trends.Is this profession growing
and if so, at what rate? In which states is the occupation growing fastest? Also take into  and if so,at what rate? In which states is the occupation growing fastest? Also take into
consideration economic and political trends that may affect this occupation. Cultural needs,  consideration economic and political trends that may affect this occupation.Cultural needs
technological innovations and new legislation are examples of trends that can either boost or  technological innovations and new legislation are examples of trends that can either boost or
threaten an occupation.  threaten an occuation.
Does It Fit Me?: Look back at your Preferences & Possibilities template and read your 
8.  8
Does It Fit Me?:Look back at your Preferences & Possibilities template and read vour"Personal Statement." Does this occupation fit with your personality style, interests and "Personal Statement."Does this occupation fit with your personality style,interests and
values? Write down similarities you see with your preferences and those listed under "Work  values? Write down similarities you see with your preferences and those listed under "Work
Styles," "Work Values" and "Interests" for this occupation on 0*NET. Also take note of key  Styles,""Work Values"and "Interests"for this occupation on O*NET.Also take note of key
differences. Look at your Work/Life Wheel template. Will this job have a positive or negative  differences.Look at your Work/Life Wheel template.Will this job have a positive or negative
impact on your wishes for the future? Does the job excite you? Do you see challenges or  impact on your wishes for the future? Does the job excite you? Do you see challenges or
opportunities with the occupation? Look over all of the information in this completed column  opportunities with the occupation? Look over all of the information in this completed column
and ask yourself, "Is this job a fit for who I am?" You are the only one who can answer this  and ask yourself,"ls this job a fit for who I am?" You are the only one who can answer this
question. Your answer may be "yes" but only with certain conditions, such as if you were to  question.Your answer may be "yes" but only with certain conditions,such as if you were to
work in a certain type of organization. Or your answer could be a clear "no."  work in a certain type of organization.Or your answer could be a clear no.
Final Evaluation: Complete all three columns and as many additional Choices in Context  9. 
9. Final Evaluation: Complete all three columns and as many additional Choices in Context
templates as necessary to make a comprehensive comparison. (Additional templates can be  templates as necessary to make a comprehensive comparison.(Additional templates can be
found at the back of this binder). As a final evaluation for this stage of The Career Compass  found at the back of this binder.As a final evaluation for this stage of The Career Compass
process, look over all of the occupations you have researched and choose your top two or  process,look over all of the occupations you have researched and choose your top two or
three.  three.
After completing one or more of the Choices in Context templates, you should have two or three  After completing one or more of the Choices in Context templates,you should have two or three
occupations that seem like viable options. You will probably be intrigued to learn more and, if you  occupations that seem like viable options.You will probably be intrigued to learn more and,if you
haven't already done so, start talking to some people in this profession. You will investigate these  haven't already done so,start talking to some people in this profession. You will investigate these
occupations further in the following Networking Map and A Day in the Life exercises.  occupations further in the following Networking Map and A Day in the Life exercises.
Use the "Notes" page following the template to capture any additional observations or thoughts.  Use the "Notespage following the template to capture any additional observations or thoughts
0 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONACT7 	 O 2OO9THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL
43 43 
	
START  START
HERE  HERE
44 	 44
The Career Compass 	 The Career Compass
Sample Answers for Choices in Context:  Sample Answers for Choices in Context
1.  JOB FAMILY:  JOB FAMILY
Education,  Education.
Training and Training and 
Library.  Library.
4.  SKILLS/EDUCATION 
SKILLS/EDUCATION
A
I WOULD NEED:  I WOULD NEED
Administration &  Administration &
mgmt. training,  mgmt. training
personnel and HR  personnel and HR
training. May require  training. May require
M.A., Ph.D. or law  M.A.,Ph.D.or Iaw
degree, depending  degree,depending
on setting. on setting. 
5. 
TRANSFERABLE  TRANSFERABLE
5
SKILLS I HAVE:  SKILLSI HAVE
English: reading  Englishreading
comprehension,  comprehension,
speaking. People  speaking.People
skills: Active  skills:Active
listening, teaching,  listening,teaching
service orientation.  service orientation.
Computer skills.  Computer skills
14. SALARY RANGE:  SALARY RANGE
6.
$30,000 to  $30,000 to
$84,000. Median:  $84.000.Median
$47,000.  $47,000.
2.  OCCUPATIONS: 
OCCUPATIONS 2
Elementary school  Elementary school
teacher, librarian,  teacher,librarian
curator.  curator.
3.  JOB FUNCTIONS:  3.JOB FUNCTIONS:
Managing library  Managing library
materials.  materials.
—readers' advisory  readers'advisory
services  services
—strategic research  strategicresearch
—filtering info  filtering info
—databases and  databases and
info systems  info systems
CHOICES IN CONTEXT
OCCUPATION
S/Euctin Pan PineMt
Tranaterabi Sha TMane
y ng
DCCUPATION
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS- 
Settings: Public libraries,  Settings:Public libraries
schools, colleges  schools,colleges
and universities,  and universities,
museums, corporations,  museums,corporations,
government agencies,  government agencies,
law firms, nonprofits,  law firms,nonprofits,
and healthcare.  and healthcare.
15. EMPLOYMENT 	8.  DOES IT FIT ME?: 
DOESIT FIT ME?
EMPLOYMENT
8
T
Characteristics  Characteristics
Characteristics 	
TRENDS: 	 TRENDS:
Characteristics
that fit me: 	 that don't fit me:  that fit me:
Slower growth 	
that don't fit me:
Slower growth
Conventional, 
projected (0-9%
projected (0-9%). 	Independence, 	
Independence,
Conventional.
So. Carolina and 	 relationships, 	working with public 
working with public
So.Carolina and
relationships,
may be difficult. 
artistic, 	
NV have the highest
may be difficult
NV have the highest 	
artistic,
growth rates. 	 growth rates.
Internet is affecting
investigative. 	Answer: Only  investigative.
Answer:Only partially. 
Internet is affecting 	
this occupation.  this occupation
A completed template might look like this:  A completed template mightlook like this
The Career Cer
CHOICES IN CONTEXT  CHOICES IN CONTEXT
S
Pe
Ft: :PO," - S''''''04:7=4,11 .", 
Sc.., OkAmiik, , 	
TiCnelOa
Seeroseps
Qom/ A...,  4. 	
DT D
';,. 1;;;',2Akg   
4164a, k' 
partially.
-0 f : eAler,I iv 'bk., - ewe-. 4,,, 
 
Ti+CocversCor 
Cow Orla
DR CnswDTR CS-Dosst V: Res44-yemhz * , se f-o.sw 1 ,147* fil,  Resdan, C:o4'..k. Sw(-44.1 
rHeln Ps
• Da. II TN MP, 	,,,,,....kt, tiellAt, Mors 
\‘Petar.Si,  e.,,,, Ii.../ - - .o-p,s,v 
ES
DFe
iksimer: Pc 
AnsorSt ane f AngerIe hd
AnsserNe
r *Id /Ake a aivd 	
Ammo,  , Ses ,12.1 a•ly , a 60. 27w e'v"....W4  AIME, 
 : Ak .1 
Mbd0
%,  S 
.1kireY  =It C:.*41
EmOkopnent 	Amoy ,,,, 	c.6C 	
nk ma 9
• 
Ymm. 	
Ba
Ae
, I  /  -, ,010,......„.„,.. 
 is 
.4 	
3M
, ,  :.  rri,."-' 
db 7
'•  'VI  ct,I.:::;1: 	 Yod
 t
•• .1I:14761::—'-  CZNPOPITY 4 Se*. SIRO ''''''"arl.""4.5. ''-''' 	
Wu
AIMS .f...,,'" 	
I ta
wbah
fARAR I 
F
oc
T Wed
70".74m114 UMAHIE'rai, 1 AVM 	5514 	.*   HX
•
"", 1 	r, 
T
i*b's 	 TE
E
ETrS
% 11f 
OCCUPATION
OCCUPATION 	;,-1-4.  
-.. 	
. 	
,, I  04CEOZ cftusetee 
CAREER CHSELOR
, 
14/0,  *Al Wm.. 
	 - 
-. 	
JOS FAPPLT 	
$Yor
164 	
JOB FAMILY
TYSCLSE
OCCUPATION
OCCUPATION 	
S' 	/ 55 x 
55%
•• 	
OCCUPATION OCCUPATION 
1.4.4.  ATah,T. ,...,  42X• TN.  
.1..,   
fr 	
iciao,FAmity OociAt  Rawl 	 CHILDFAMICYSOCIALE
40140sict ft meuaTileolsrl  R RUGEFAMILYTHGKAPIST
,,,,,i  _.,,,,, ..rt,/  ,,,,,,,, ...,,,,,.,./ 
02„,,,,, 2, 4,,,d, ,,, _t...... a,,, 	
rm 	
Caoa't S..0.,,,,louS PReo of .4., 	 CACILTDuOALS.PWDEVND
Dnnseand tetadco
ieel-D
-  C41111,et , one,-,.. 
EDV.0 T iloUlt 4 to...4ran44, a(4.1.4IJCP, 	arathy„, 7C,,,,i„. ,,,X --4,4,„ 	0, 	ta TILATCOE
v
ebdo
Tecron
SHS
lob functions 	-e...,..000./ ,SPNeS 	• 
SJot
cp pe
DDus
Sndsyo
Z frmrA tAt4r-
VM'S 	
--7/4r0Per
Aster
51/P,  hew 5-  
SS
41. 	Of. ty  P,INIPrS 	,,,  ad fin
Hedugues
pesynhoi&n9,6.1. *4  lacs 
Mgdf.  catIssn.4,41r -1/4,,,,,/ s,p., 4$4,,,es 
Shunts
ae
foedher
seh 	
*Pal 114 Ir.047  6,u,cs' nod.,  m.., ,44 iliff5.77Z4 or FND ,. Ale,,,y ..... 
' Teter E,:. 	 sD'sDE CeSl de 	
PHD
Tahscs
,,,,,,,,, 	1 	ry  , 66,.,5, PI,P,, 
oeoThgchn
• 
Plallu, Education 	-.."... 7„da  
cver a
• 
9cm
sooyadcesnd
, we.,. N..,  11  17174,,,,...Z.  '')',426:1.0••I•IT 	 I Wouid Nend
A
Mafoat
AP 	 Sed
&PPM 
APAP/Ili 
e 	...... 10'.-g„,,,p.5/*.,.. 14:4VP,ITI4,7, 
Meo
..‘ 	 '  9.6.  etc* ......".71.t.  —  ass 12,Ve .4 SgA.I lark 1......L..) 	
n5s
0
CoE
ss  0  . Ac,,, 4-5,„„-,,,,S.4.11  14,44.o.,esS),o, 
oAune
C
• .1 /led!, C/1..ele.sa.. C06,,,,,op, 	
C 
' 
d,,,7,' 
44.4 1.e.‘,..;,.. 5 . L....i.z 4,1,475 
  
AchreL
SG
:7,7,747.;: li 
cci m
tsf 
C........,ic.,*0,7 ,5en.e Ofig.1,  I Iso; 
4 1ZtI-•D  I R- ant.« 1...s. soy 
e P=0`  .Vt; 	
Dos Mecin
 	
icnorSoraeOrra
NO
hngsg ugude
,f,  s., ..s.  '-,.,  ;24,1411 9 On ,  .1.1((=  018,44, - $44,2m 	
s‘i  t  — 
26
,,,,... 
124,3a -4,,4.0 	
,,k,,„,, x„,,,, 
9,i3,5I0 -744,qa 41:40•1 f.-Aav 	
44
23-16775
msanty
• cow/re...we gasp Pp uoviNT 
2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL 0 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL' P 
   
       
   
       
   
       
   
     
   
     
   
     
   
     
The Career Comizsmss  CHOICES IN CONTEXT  CHOICES IN CONTEXT
The Career Comass Does It Fit Me? Does It Fit M 
• 
Employment  Employment Trends  Trends
JOB FAMILY  JOB FAMILY
4 LLLL LAu t  tt 	
•-•"""'„  t Y  
ii t 	, 	I 	
OCCUPATION  OCCUPATION
OCCUPATION  OCCUPATION
OCCUPATION  OCCUPATION
• 
L. Job Functions  Job Functions
Skills/Education  Skills/Education I Would Need  I Would Need
• 
• 	
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS" 	 VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS
The Career Compass The Career Compass 
Notes:  Notes:
0 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL' r 	 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL
4 47 
• 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 	 VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS
Stage 6  Stage 6
NETWORKING MAP  NETWORKING MAP
The Career Compass  The Career Compass
For the Choices in Context template, you were most likely looking at  For the Choices in Context template,you were most likely looking at
secondary sources of research such as the Internet, magazines and books.  secondary sources of research such as the Internet,magazines and books
With the Networking Map, you will continue to learn about occupations and  With the Networking Map,you will continue to learn about occupations and
the job market, but through primary research—by talking to people one  thejob market, but through primary research-by talking to people one
on one. You may have already begun to discuss your career interests with  on one.You may have already begun to discuss your career interests with
family, friends or even some new acquaintances. If this is true, you've already  family,friends or even some new acquaintances.lf this is true,you've already
started networking.  started networking.
Networking is done for many reasons: to conduct informational interviews,  Networking is done for many reasons: to conduct informational interviews
to let others know of your job search, or to develop relationships that will  to let others know of your job search,or to develop relationships that will
help you further your career. The Networking Map helps you plan and track  hrrerrrrrrrrnrrtrorrrrrrrrrrrrtrrrrrttprnrnrrrtrprererrork
your networking efforts as well as develop your networking skills. Because  your networking efforts as well as develop your networking skills.Because
networking can be daunting to some, this exercise helps you prepare yourself  networking can be daunting to some,this exercise helps you prepare yourself
with the right materials, conversation points and questions to make talking to  with the right materials,conversation points and guestions to make talking to
others easier. The benefits of networking are critical to any career change— others easier. The benefits of networking are critical to any career change
you will gain crucial knowledge that isn't available from secondary sources,  you will gain crucial knowledge that isn't available from secondary sources,
and you may make the right connection that lands you a job.  and you may make the right connection that lands you a job.
The art and science of asking questions  The art and science of asking guestions
is the source of all knowledge.  is the source of all knowledge
Thomas Berger (novelist)  Thomas Berger (novelist)
O2009THEGROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL 0 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL 
49 
.'.il~7►I1:E:[i7~e7r  NETWORKING MAP
50 	 50
The Career Compass 	 The Career Compass
NETWORKING MAP  NETWORKING MAP
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS" 
Organize Your Communication Efforts  Organize Your Communication Efforts
The instructions below are primarily for someone beginning to network through informational  The instructions below are primarily for someone beginning to network through informational
interviews; however, as you become more focused on one occupation, your networking may change  interviews;however,as you become more focused on one occupation,your networking may change
from general research to job hunt to continued career development. At whatever stage you are with  from general research to job hunt to continued career development. At whatever stage you are with
networking, your Networking Map will keep you on track.  networking,your Networking Map will keep you on track.
STEPS  STEPS
Evaluate the data you have collected thus far in The Career Compass process. Before you begin  Evaluate the data you have collected thus far in The Career Compass process. Before you begin
networking, it is important to know who you are and which occupation(s) you are interested in.  networking, it is important to know who you are and which occupation(s) you are interested in.
Plan on conducting many informational interviews for the two or three occupations you selected in  Plan on conducting many informational interviews for the two or three occupations you selected in
the Choices in Context template. The Networking Map is designed to organize, but not necessarily  the Choices in Context template.The Networking Map is designed to organize,but not necessarily
contain, all of your communication details. Be aware that the information you gather through  contain,all of your communication details.Be aware that the information you gather through
networking will be used in the following Career Compass templates: A Day in the Life, Path  networking will be used in the following Career Compass templates:A Day in the Life,Path
Exploration and Action Plan. Make sure to keep good notes of each conversation.  Exploration and Action Plan.Make sure to keep good notes of each conversation.
Materials to Prepare: Since you never know when an opportunity will appear, it is important to be  Materials to Prepare: Since you never know when an opportunity will appear,it is important to be
organized before you start contacting others.  organized before you start contacting others.
Resume: While an informational interview is not a job interview, you may have the opportunity  Resume:While an informational interview is not a job interview,you may have the opportunity
to share your resume. (See the Appendix for resources that will help you create a resume.)  to share your resume.(See the Appendix for resources that will help you create a resume.
Business Cards: If you are currently employed, be sure to bring your business cards with you or  Business Cards:if you are currently employed,be sure to bring your business cards with you or
take time to create your own business cards.  take time to create your own business cards.
Record-Keeping System: It's a good idea to create a record-keeping system for detailed  Record-Keeping SystemIt's a good idea to create a record-keeping system for detailed
information. Whether you keep records on your computer or in this binder, you'll want to  information.Whether you keep records on your computer or in this binder,you'll want to
capture information that would allow you to reconnect at a later date. Information you keep  capture information that would allow you to reconnect at a later date.Information you keep
should include the name and contact information of the individual; his or her company's name,  should include the name and contact information of the individual; his or her company's name
position and area of expertise; date of the initial call; referrals from this contact; key points  position and area of expertise;date of the initial call;referrals from this contact;key points
you learned in the meeting; any follow-up necessary, date you sent your thank-you note, and a  you learned in the meetingany follow-up necessary,date you sent your thank-you note,and a
follow-up date.  follow-up date.
1. 
Introductory Statement: This brief statement helps start a conversation. It should include  1.Introductory Statement:This brief statement helps start a conversation. It should include
your name, what you are currently doing or have done recently, how you found the individual  your name,what you are currently doing or have done recently,how you found the individual
and why you would like to talk to the individual. Begin by writing a draft of your introductory  and why you would like to talk to the individual. Begin by writing a draft of your introductory
statement, then practice it out loud, and revise it until you feel natural saying it to yourself.  statement,then practice it out loud,and revise it until you feel natural saying it to yourself
Once you are happy with your statement, add it to your map. Once you have your introduction  Once you are happy with your statement,add it to your map.Once you have your introduction
solidified, you will be able to tailor it to each person you talk to.  solidified,you will be able to tailor it to each person you talk to.
2. Questions to Ask: Before contacting individuals, be sure to create a list of eight to ten  Questions to Ask: Before contacting individuals,be sure to create a list of eight to ten
2.
questions. You may want to have three to four questions that you ask everyone to help  questions.You may want to have three to four questions that you ask everyone to help
compare answers. As you meet more people, you'll find some of the questions work better  compare answers.As you meet more people,you'll find some of the guestions work better
than others and you may want to revise your list. It's better to have more questions than  than others and you may want to revise your list. It's better to have more questions than
you'll need, but don't feel that you need to ask all of them. Relax and go with the flow of the  you'll need,but don't feel that you need to ask all of them.Relax and go with the flow of the
conversation. (See sample questions on page 55.)  conversation.(See sample questions on page 55.)
Info to Exchange: Consider or research information you can share. It may be a recent article  3. 
3. Info to Exchange: Consider or research information you can share.It may be a recent article
you've read, a good book, information about a future conference or information that you  you've read,a good book, information about a future conference or information that you
already possess. Offering to send an article or website url is a great way to follow up. Keep in  already possess.Offering to send an article or website url is a great way to follow up. Keep in
mind that you want to not only be making contacts, but building relationships that may benefit  mind that you want to not only be making contacts,but building relationships that may benefit
you and your entire network in the future.  you and your entire network in the future.
2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTSINTERNATIONALV ®2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL."' 
• 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 	 VISUAL PLANNNG SYSTES
The Career Compass  The Career Compass
Networking Goals: As you set out to build your network, each ring on the template asks  4. 
4. Networking Goals: As you set out to build your network,each ring on the template asks
you to set goals. The number of people you talk to when you first begin networking may be  you to set goals. The number of people you talk to when you first begin networking may be
modest. However, as you build your network, your goals will become more significant. For  modest.However,as you build your network,your goals will become more significant.For
example, your goal for Friends & Family may be to talk to four people and get four referrals in  example,your goal for Friends & Family may be to talk to four people and get four referrals in
one week. Your goal for Acquaintances & Associates may be to talk to twelve people and get  one week.Your goal for Acquaintances & Associates may be to talk to twelve people and get
twenty-four referrals in two months. Realistically determine the date by which you would like  twenty-four referrals in two months. Realistically determine the date by which you wouldlike
to accomplish each goal. It may be difficult to find a time when both you and your networking  to accomplish each goal.It may be difficult to find a time when both you and your networking
contacts can meet, so keep that in mind when selecting your goal dates.  contacts can meet, so keep that in mind when selecting your goal dates.
Friends & Family: Often we overlook those closest to us as networking opportunities.  5. 
Friends & Family Often we overlook those closest to us as networking opportunities 5
However, if you're new to networking or just starting again, they are the best place to begin.  However, if you're new to networking or just starting again,they are the best place to begin.
Write down some individuals you will feel comfortable talking with. This is a good place to  Write down some individuals you will feel comfortable talking with.This is a good place to
practice your communication skills. Be sure to take it seriously—these individuals may have  practice your communication skills. Be sure to take it seriously-these individuals may have
wonderful contacts for you. Put a date next to each person you speak to. Record any referrals  wonderful contacts for you.Put a date next to each person you speak to.Record any referrals
you get in the referral ring.If possible,draw a line from the original contact to his/her referrals. you get in the referral ring. If possible, draw a line from the original contact to his/her referrals. 
Acquaintances & Associates: Now that you've practiced your skills, it's time to move on to  6. 
6. Acguaintances & Associates: Now that you've practiced your skills,it's time to move on to
other people you may not know as well. These could be social acquaintances whom you have  other people you may not know as well.These could be social acquaintances whom you have
met or will meet at a party. Past or present teachers can make great contacts. Those around  met or will meet at a party.Past or present teachers can make great contacts.Those arouna
you in your workplace might be helpful as well. Down the line, they may let you know of a job  you in your workplace might be helpful as well. Down the line,they may let you know of a job
opening in their department or division. When considering associates don't forget vendors,  opening in their department or division. When considering associates don't forget vendors
people you do business with and, if appropriate, your customers.  people you do business with and,if appropriateyour customers.
7. Professional Organizations: Look into associations or events that interest you.You may
Professional Organizations: Look into associations or events that interest you. You may  7. 
share information you've learned through networking and research about the industry. As you  share information you've learned through networking and research about the industry.As you
distribute resumes and business cards, ask others for their business cards so you can reach  distribute resumes and business cards,ask others for their business cards so you can reach
them later. Write the date you received the card and where and how you met that contact.  them later. Write the date you received the card and where and how you met that contact
Referrals: This circle allows you to capture the many referrals you'll be given. Track the  8. 
8.Referrals:This circle allows you to capture the many referrals you'll be given.Track the
person who referred you to a contact by writing his/her name in parentheses, or by drawing a  person who referred you to a contact by writing his/her name in parentheses,or by drawing a
line on the template to show the connection. When introducing yourself, remember to include  line on the template to show the connection.When introducing yourself,remember to include
the name of the person who referred you.  the name of the person who referred you.
More Referrals & Contacts: The wonderful thing about networking is constantly increasing  9. 
9. More Referrals & Contacts:The wonderful thing about networking is constantly increasing
your connections. Keep track of the referrals you get from other referrals. You may also try  your connections.Keep track of the referrals you get from other referrals.You may also try
contacting people you've read about or whose work you admire. You may be surprised by the  contacting people you've read about or whose work you admire.You may be surprised by the
number of people who are willing to help you.  number of people who are willing to help you.
10. Follow-through: It is very important to thank those who have taken the time to speak with  10.Follow-through It is very important to thank those who have taken the time to speak with
you. You will also find that the strength of your network depends on your follow-through efforts.  you.You will also find that the strength of your network depends on your follow-through efforts.
Keeping in touch with people will boost your potential for opportunities. Your network of  Keeping in touch with people will boost your potential for opportunities.Your network of
individuals will support not only job searches but continued learning. Some individuals who  individuals will support not only job searches but continued learning.Some individuals who
have similar jobs and challenges may decide to create communities of practice and meet  have similar jobs and challenges may decide to create communities of practice and meet
informally once a month to share information.  informally once a month to share information.
Networking is an ongoing process and is a key to keeping your options open. You should continue  Networking is an ongoing process and is a key to keeping your options open. You should continue
to work your Networking Map as you complete the remaining A Day in the Life, Path Exploration  to work your Networking Map as you complete the remaining A Day in the Life,Path Exploratior
and Action Plan templates. In addition, you should continue to cycle back to your Networking Map  and Action Plan templates.In addition,you should continue to cycle back to your Networking Map
as you advance further in the career-planning process. Even after you take a new or different job,  as you advance further in the career-planning process.Even after you take a new or different job
keep in mind that continuing to build your network can greatly help you manage your career.  keep in mind that continuing to build your network can greatly help you manage your career
ID 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL'V 	 2009THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALV
51 51 
START  START
HERE  HERE
The Career Compass 	 The Career Compass
Sample Answers for Networking Map:  Sample Answers for Networking Map
INTRODUCTORY STATEMENT:Hello,my name is Jane Johnson.I'm 1. INTRODUCTORY STATEMENT: Hello, my name is Jane Johnson. I'm 
currently working as an information technology technician at XYZ  currently working as an information technology technician at XYz
Company. I'm exploring career options in the healthcare field and my Company. I'm exploring career options in the healthcare field and my 
friend Bob Jones recommended that I get in touch with you for an  friend Bob Jones recommended that I get in touch with you for an
informational interview. I'd like to meet with you for about thirty to  informational interview.l'd like to meet with you for about thirty to
forty-five minutes. Is there a time in the next few weeks that will work  forty-five minutes.Is there a time in the next few weeks that will work
for you?  for you?
NETWORKING MAP
CINTRODUCTOR
STATEMENT
9. MORE REFERRALS:  9.
MOREREFERRALS Your second tier of  Your second tier of
referrals—use as  referrals-use as
your referrals grow.  your referrals grow
OUESTIONS TOAS
MEFERRRIS
INFO TO EXCHANGE
7. PROFESSIONAL 
8. REFERRALS: Your first 
7.PROFESSIONAL
REFERRALS:Your first
8.
tier of referrals—the  tier of referrals--the
contacts you get from  contacts you get from
the first three rings.  the first three rings.
A completed template might look like this:  A completed template might look like this:
Tn. 	
The Cr Comp NETWORKING MAP
NETWORKING MAP 
NETRODUCTONY STATEMENT  INTRODUCTORY STATEMENT
irofiel s•cacz. 
SCheTe
44
my nme iS Wael' 	
-Itt  
' 	nn
Yacaty been wwi in arlehn
teen *at
ow  107 z1.14:ere-S , 	 acbg 
.91 iY.Ittsr TM.CiremI:,  p.ksV.LwcseY
O.be.
ries btcwtmma 
CArtinle.,9 
ds
rteTV.Acollee Ssan C
-tottl-e24C4311M3='-to  tau uith vacId ove' to
yrCeo pnd xperier
cma 
row Galen 	
aDst
ORGANIZATIONS:  ORGANIZATIONS:
Member of an Member of an 
association,  association,
people you meet  people you meet
at workshops and  at workshops and
conferences.  conferences
ilaimf is a 1e41 clay like -F•.- y447 
Y  NOUND? ?  QUESTIONS TO ASK 
f is y y li f y
Ins   ivh:DAd
• oaf c• yr like cad c;ee
t de y nd Oisia yojob'
Cd y t tisjobhef as Coedr
-twat  efecnto 
 d soone..gt ina Nr
itreArerdo.yet  Catirl  
marletm nis indus4X
1GS  IncluS`try  Paeetald
 Betr marc Aort Mbicy
.Cathy #
melvs
mx
eea t Se eHP 2b Jinne
Cist
Dand Che Drny
Cane k
SDSoshe
c
alae
NYAMK +Anne Wake BMIMA
oNoran Lnwinstin
FY
evawit
hc con uhife
C Cisco
• tvlos. ?note. NrIty  man BrnC DK
FRIENDSAMILY
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 
2. 
QUESTIONS TO ASK:  QUESTIONS TO ASK
2.
What is a typical day  What is a typical day
like for you? What do  like for you? What do
you like about your job?  you like about your job?
What do you dislike?  What do you dislike?
What type of skills  What type of skills
does someone in your  does someone in your
job need to have in  job need to have in
order to succeed? What  order to succeed? What
was your career path?  was your career path?
3.  3
4.  A
5.  5.
INFO TO EXCHANGE:  INFO TO EXCHANGE
Newspaper article,  Newspaper article,
magazine article,  magazine article,
information about  information about
upcoming conference  upcoming conference
or workshop, good book  or workshop,good book
on a relevant topic.  on a relevant topic
NETWORKING GOALS:  NETWORKING GOALS
Speak with 4 people,  Speak with 4 people,
get 2 referrals by  get 2 referrals by
March 1; etc.  March 1;etc.
FRIENDS & FAMILY:  FRIENDS&FAMILY
Cousin, aunt,  Cousin, aunt
grandfather, good  grandfather, good
friends of the family,  friends of the family
friends from school.  friends from school.
6. ACQUAINTANCES 
ACOUAINTANCES
G
& ASSOCIATES: &ASSOCIATES
Ex-coworker, colleague,  Ex-coworker,colleague
neighbor, friend at  neighbor,friend at
church, professor, fellow  church,professor,fellow
alumnus.  alumnus.
INFO TO .CHANGE  INFO TO EXCHANGE
TTESt •icany. 
Aricle in Tst Cmpany
1Siz 
•Ariiele 	
tick in Ziz unal• er,feeate. II Z., 1:Ay&o.  w
16,..0.,,km. on Allut..r,  
 BTraohces  m or...it ou tfit., sf61%   voe vacetscet
Maraa's hctw P Jacson
on Le mrr
ACQUANTANCES&ASSOCMTEH
oeb
 Yichria Vaig
PROFESSIONAL ONGANIEATIONS
beeFb
ws  ANYC Sy  CSa
tevin Durte JP mgn C
yTig 
WS UC C Paramt
QCve
• NJillian e,rpl1911  qbedini C DIMS, 
Je Tdini C Dsne
 Witiam Prynton eDiGey
V • araCt .•-use., • cm, 3cAS on • s wan  11,, I sm 
da Sonst
d BenS
Ttl Maaby
Tm Dnision
so madeel -F1 
San Wit GustRelatsas
On  Ri 
gtaiimS  wts 
C Resorts
52 	 52
REFERRALS
N
 Poter Rnty Bn Shs
MOREREFERRALSCONTACTS
B
SMr
ake Celey Gadntn Sans Hman Resnves
P.blc
FSLAN Sard K e maa
Glona bur ete
Nayer S i
+g
W
Toe M
SM
C2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTSINTERNATIONAL 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONACV/7 
•
The Career Compass  NETWORKING MAP 
NETWORKING MAP
The Career Compass
C-  INTRODUCTORY STATEIV11 ENT  INTRODUCTORYSTATEMENT
1 
LL
e ?? QUESTIONS TO ASK 
QUESTIONS TO ASK
FRIENDS &FAMILY FRIENDS & FAMILY 
Networking Goal  Networking Goal
#Spoken With ff Spoken With. 
#of Referrals:# of Referrals: 
By Date:  By Date:
121I111it,  
ACQUAINTANCES &ASSOCIATES ACQUAINTANCES & ASSOCIATES 
110  Networking Goal  Networking Goal
#Spoken With# Spoken With: 
#of Referrals# of Referrals: 
By Date: 	
 
By Date:
PROFESSIONALORGANIZATIONS PROFESSIONAL ORGANIZATIONS 
Networking Goal L__ Networking Goal #Spoken With
Spoken With: #of Referrals# of Referrals: 
By Date
By Date: 	
REFERRALS  REFERRALS
 
+lip  INFO TO EXCHANGE 
INFO TO EXCHANGE
• 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS' 	 VISUAL PLANNINGSYSTEMS
Sample Questions for Networking and Informational Interviews  Sample Questions for Networking and Informational Interviews
QUESTIONS ABOUT THE JOB  QUESTIONS ABOUT THE JOB
Tell me what a "typical" day, week and month look like for you.  Tell me what a "typical" day,week and month look like for you.
What do you like about your job? What do you dislike?  What do you like about your job? What do you dislike?
The Career Compass  The Career Compass
What type of skills does someone in a position like yours need in order to succeed? How did  What type of skills does someone in a position like yours need in order to succeed? How did
you acquire the necessary skills and knowledge?  you acquire the necessary skills and knowledge?
What was your path to this job? How would someone entering this field get a job today?  What was your path to this job? How would someone entering this field get a job today?
Where do you go next? What is your next career step?  Where do you go next? What is your next career step?
QUESTIONS ABOUT THE COMPANY  QUESTIONS ABOUT THE COMPANY
What do you like about working for this organization? What do you dislike?  What do you like about working for this organization? What do you dislike?
How do the employees have fun? Do you celebrate accomplishments, anniversaries? Do you  How do the employees have fun? Do you celebrate accomplishments,anniversaries? Do you
socialize outside the workplace?  socialize outside the workplace?
How are decisions made?  How are decisions made?
• • • 
Do you have regular performance reviews? Are they formal or informal? (Tell me about your  Do you have regular performance reviews? Are they formal or informal?(Tell me about your
performance-management system?)  performance-management system?)
What type of training does the organization provide? What type of training does the organization provide? 
How is excellent performance rewarded and acknowledged How is excellent performance rewarded and acknowledged? 
Who is the most important stakeholder for your business: employee, customer, or  Who is the most important stakeholder for your business: employee,customer, or
shareholder?  shareholder?
QUESTIONS ABOUT THE INDUSTRY QUESTIONS ABOUT THE INDUSTRY 
What areas of this industry are growing? Which are declining?  What areas of this industry are growing? Which are declining?
What do you see as challenges to the industry in the next three to five years?  What do you see as challenges to the industry in the next three to five years?
Who do you feel are the trendsetters—the people to watch—in this industry?  Who do vou feel are the trendsetters-the people to watch--in this industry?
Are you a member of any professional organizations?  Are you a member of any professional organizations?
What would you recommend for someone who is entering this profession or industry?  What would you recommend for someone who is entering this profession or industry?
What magazines and trade journals do you read to keep current on trends and industry  What magazines and trade journals do you read to keep current on trends and industry
information?  information?
© 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL 	 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL
55 55 
• 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS . 	 VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS
Stage 7  Stage 7
A DAY IN THE LIFE  A DAY IN THE LIFE
The Career Compass  The Career Compass
Now that you've done a fair amount of research, and you've begun getting  Now that you've done a fair amount of research, and you've begun getting
additional first-hand information through networking, you are ready for the  additional first-hand information through networking,you are ready for the
next step: imagining what it would be like to spend a day in an occupation.  next step:imagining what it would be like to spend a day in an occupation
At this point in the process, you should have a clearer idea of the one or  At this point in the process,you should have a clearer idea of the one or
two careers or career shifts to pursue. For this template, not only will you  two careers or career shifts to pursue. For this template, not only will you
be imagining what your life would be like at work, you will also take into  be imagining what your life would be like at work,you will also take into
consideration what a career choice would mean for your life outside of work.  consideration what a career choice would mean for your life outside of work
A Day in the Life is an opportunity to craft as well as test your ideas about  A Day in the Life is an opportunity to craft as well as test your ideas about
what your ideal job would be like. You might paint a picture of the perfect job  whatyour ideal job would be like.You might paint a picture of the perfectjob
and corresponding life situation on your first try, or it may take you several  and corresponding life situation on your first try, or it may take you several
tries to find the right ingredients for you at this point in life. Take your time  tries to find the right ingredients for you at this point in life. Take your time
and create a detailed image of your desired future.  and create a detailed image of your desired future.
A DAY IN THE LIFE
asatn
I have learned, that if one advances  I have learned,that if one advances
• 	
confidently in the direction of his dreams,  confidently in the direction of his dreams
and endeavors to live the life he has  and endeavors to live the life he has
imagined, he will meet with a success  imagined, he will meet with a success
unexpected in common hours.  unexpected in common hours
Henry David Thoreau  Henry David Thoreau
IT 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL-Vr   2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL
57 
n It I  I  I L,RI  7/ 
A DAY IN THE LIFE
58 	 5
The Career Compass 	 The Career Compass
A DAY IN THE LIFE  A DAY IN THE LIFE
VISUAL PLANNG SYSTEMS VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 
Experience an Occupation  Experience an Occupation
A Day in the Life allows you to imagine yourself in an occupation. For this template you will be  A Day in the Life allows you to imagine yourself in an occupation. For this template you will be
describing your day from the moment you wake up to when you go to bed. Use as much concrete  describing your day from the moment you wake up to when you go to bed.Use as much concrete
data about your chosen occupation as you can. Informational interviewing—actually speaking to  data about your chosen occupation as you can.lnformational interviewing -actually speaking to
someone who is in the occupation—is highly recommended.  someone who is in the occupation-is highly recommended.
STEPS  STEPS
By completing the Choices in Context template and working on your Networking Map, you should  By completing the Choices in Context template and working on your Networking Map,you should
have narrowed down your occupation choices (or career moves) to two or three. Use the A Day  have narrowed down your occupation choices (or career moves to two or three.Use the A Day
in the Life exercise to fully explore each one. You may need to fill in several A Day in the Life  in the Life exercise to fully explore each one. You may need to fill in several A Day in the Life
templates until you find the right fit for you. (You can find extra templates in the Appendix).  templates until you find the right fit for you.(You can find extra templates in the Appendix.
Occupation & Organization: Choose the occupation that most interests you and record  Occupation & Organization:Choose the occupation that most interests you and record
1.
its name at the top of the page. Also, choose a specific organization you are interested in  its name at the top of the page.Also,choose a specific organization you are interested in
researching.  researching.
Pre-Work Activities: Picture yourself asleep and the alarm goes off. What time is it?  2. Pre-Work Activities: Picture yourself asleep and the alarm goes off.What time is it?
What time do people doing this occupation usually arrive at work? For most people it would  What time do people doing this occupation usually arrive at work? For most people it would
be morning, but for a few the work day may begin in the afternoon or the evening. Think  be morning,but for a few the work day may begin in the afternoon or the evening.Think
about where you'd like to live if different from where you are now—what city, neighborhood,  about where you'd like to live if different from where you are now--what city,neighborhood
apartment, house and so on. Are you living alone or with others? What activities are part of  apartment,house and so on.Are you living alone or with others? What activities are part of
your morning routine? What clothes do you wear to work? How long is your commute and  your morning routine? What clothes do you wear to work? How long is your commute and
what type of transportation are you using? This scenario may or may not reflect your current  what type of transportation are you using? This scenario may or may not reflect your current
situation.  situation.
Work Schedule: First look at the Annual Calendar at the top of the day planner. Highlight the  3.Work Schedule:First look at the Annual Calendar at the top of the day planner. Highlight the
days of the week in each month that you would be working. Is this a Monday-through-Friday  days of the week in each month that you would be working. Is this a Monday-through-Friday
occupation? Is there weekend work? Is this occupation project-based? Then fill in when a  occupation? Is there weekend work? Is this occupation project-based? Then fill in when a
typical Work Day Begins and when the Work Day Ends. Are the hours flexible? Is there the  typical Work Day Begins and when the Work Day Ends. Are the hours flexible? Is there the
possibility of overtime? Also record a time when you get to take a Break and imagine how you  possibility of overtime? Also record a time when you get to take a Break and imagine how you
might be spending your break—socializing, exercising, attending a class, etc.  might be spending your break-socializing,exercising,attending a class,etc
Environment: Picture your workplace. Is it in the city in a large high-rise, or perhaps in the  4. Environment:Picture your workplace.Is it in the city in a large high-rise,or perhaps in the
country in a small building? Is it a large or small organization? Do you work in an office, and if  country in a small building? Is it a large or small organization? Do you work in an office,and if
so, what kind of office? Do you work in a cubicle? Do you work outside?  so, what kind of office Do you work in a cubicle? Do you work outside
Culture: Research the organization on the Internet and explore its website. Most  Culture:Research the organization on the Internet and explore its website.Most
5.
organizations include information about their mission, values and products or services. Talk  organizations include information about their mission,values and products or services. Talk
to someone in the organization to get a clearer sense. Is the culture highly professional,  to someone in the organization to get a clearer sense.ls the culture highly professional,
with employees wearing suits on a daily basis, or is the culture more casual? Is it stable and  with employees wearing suits on a daily basis,or is the culture more casual? ls it stable and
secure or fast-paced and high-risk? Do people work their way up the ranks, or do people tend  secure or fast-paced and high-risk? Do people work their way up the ranks,or do people tenc
to come and go based on project needs? Is the atmosphere competitive or collaborative?  to come and go based on project needs? Is the atmosphere competitive or collaborative?
Coworker & Customer Interaction: Do you work independently or in a team? Are you part of  6.-Coworker & Customer Interaction:Do you work independently or in a team? Are you part of
a large department or work group? Whom do you report to, and do others report to you? Who  a large department or work group? Whom do you report to,and do others report to you? Who
are your customers? How do you interact with them?  are your customers? How do you interact with them?
Everyday Duties: What work do you do on a daily basis? What types of projects do you work on?  7. Everyday Duties:What work do you do on a daily basis? What types of projects do you work on?
2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL-Vr 
• • • 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 	 VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS
The Career Compass The Career Compass 
8. 
Other Responsibilities: Are there duties that you would fulfill on a weekly or monthly basis?  Other Responsibilities: Are there duties that you would fulfill on a weekly or monthly basis?
8
Research to find opportunities for becoming involved in projects that interest you specifically,  Research to find opportunities for becoming involved in projects that interest you specifically
such as a community-service project. Does the job include travel?  such as a community-service project.Does the job include travel?
9. Skills Used: What skills are you using in your job? What knowledge do you need to do your job  9. Skills Used:What skills are you using in your job? What knowledge do you need to do your job
well? On the Choices in Context template you looked at all the skills used in the occupation.  well? On the Choices in Context template you looked at all the skills used in the occupation
However, the position at a specific organization may be a bit different. Record pertinent  However, the position at a specific organization may be a bit different. Record pertinent
information for this organization.  information for this organization.
10. Technologies Used: Record the technology you use on the job. Are you learning a new  10.Technologies Used: Record the technology you use on the job.Are you learning a new
software program or working with tools you've never used before?  software program or working with tools you've never used before?
11. After-Work Activities: Use this space to write down what happens once you leave work.  11.After-Work Activities:Use this space to write down what happens once you leave work
How long is your commute? Do you go to the gym or play in a sports league? Are you taking  How long is your commute? Do you go to the gym or play in a sports league? Are you taking
evening classes? Do you go out with coworkers or meet friends after work? Do you have family  evening classes? Do you go out with coworkers or meet friends after work? Do you have family
commitments? Once you get home, how are you spending your evening? And finally, what time  commitments Once you get home,how are you spending your evening And finally,what time
are you going to bed?  are you going to bed
12. Salary & Benefits: Write down the salary range for this occupation and, if possible, in this  12.Salary & Benefits:Write down the salary range for this occupation and,if possible,in this
particular organization (www.salary.com  can help with general salary information). Include the  hretinitrirreerrrrrerrtatieatitntiieetrrtireiirtatitetrertirrtirrtnteete
benefits offered with this job at this company. You may be able to find this information on the  benefits offered with this job at this company. You may be able to find this information on the
company's website. Examples of benefits that may be offered include health, dental, vision,  company's website.Examples of benefits that may be offered include health,dental,vision,
401(k), paid vacation and paid sick leave.  401(k), paid vacation and paid sick leave.
13. What Do You Love About Your Job? Looking over the template you have just completed,  13.What Do You Love About Your Job? Looking over the template you have just completed
pick out the top three to five things you like most about this job. You can receive insightful  pick out the top three to five things you like most about this job. You can receive insightful
answers from informational interviews about what people love about their jobs. Ask yourself,  answers from informational interviews about what people love about their jobs. Ask yourself
"Are these same things important to me?" "Are these same things important to me?"
14. What Are Your Challenges or Anxieties? Look over the completed template and pick out  14.What Are Your Challenges or Anxieties? Look over the completed template and pick out
the top three to five areas that you believe will be a challenge for you or concern you.  the top three to five areas that you believe will be a challenge for you or concern you.
15. Final Evaluation. After completing this template, you should know if the occupation is one  15.Final Evaluation. After completing this template,you should know if the occupation is one
that would fit you. Ask yourself these questions: Can I imagine being happy in this occupation?  that would fit you. Ask yourself these questions:Can I imagine being happy in this occupation?
Would I be content in this occupation, but perhaps in another organization? Would I need to  Would I be content in this occupation,but perhaps in another organization? Would I need to
make some adjustments to my life outside of work if I had this job?  make some adjustments to my life outside of work if I had this job?
Look back at your Preferences & Possibilities template. Does the job match who you are?  Look back at your Preferences & Possibilities template.Does the job match who you are?
Then look back at your Work/Life Wheel template. Does the job fit with the priorities you set?  Then look back at your Work/Life Wheel template.Does the job fit with the priorities you set?
Use the "Notes" page to record thoughts regarding these questions.  Use the "Notes" page to record thoughts regarding these questions.
Complete at least one other A Day in the Life template to make an informed choice about the  Complete at least one other A Day in the Life template to make an informed choice about the
occupation or career move you want to pursue. Repeat this exercise until you find a match  occupation or career move you want to pursue. Repeat this exercise until you find a match
that motivates you. (See Appendix for additional templates.)  that motivates you.(See Appendix for additional templates.)
After completing this stage of The Career Compass process, you should have a clear sense  After completing this stage of The Career Compass process,you should have a clear sense
of direction. Having an image of where you are headed is a big step in moving toward your  of direction. Having an image of where you are headed is a big step in moving toward your
destination.  destination.
®2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL (c  O 2009 THEGROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALV
59 59 
START  START
HERE  HERE
60 	 60
The Career Compass 	 The Career Compass
Sample Answers for A Day in the Life:  Sample Answers for A Day in the Life:
OCCUPATION &  OCCUPATION &
ORGANIZATION:  ORGANIZATION:
Outdoor school  Outdoor school
educator, REI.  educator,REl
Th CCo A DAY IN THE LIFE
A DAY IN THE LIFE 
2.
PRE-WORK ACTIVITIES: Wake up 6 a.m. Live in  PRE-WORK ACTIVITIES:Wake up 6 a.m.Live in
San Francisco, Victorian apartment with friends  San Francisco,Victorian apartment with friends
in Cole Valley. Go for coffee, bagel, ride my bike  in Cole Valley.Go for coffee,bagel,ride my bike
to work-20 minutes. 
to work20 minutes
..as an... as a(n) 
EVERYDAY DUTIES
OTHER RESPONSIBILITIES
SSALARY@BENEFITS
OTHER RESPONS-
8.
OTHER RESPONS
IBILITIES: CPR,  IBILITIES:CPR
Wilderness First  Wilderness First
Responder, first aid.  Responder, first aid.
AFTER-WORK  11.AFTER-WORK
ACTIVITIES: Take dog  ACTIVITIES:Take dog
to park, go out to  to park,go out to
dinner with friends,  dinner with friends
read a book. Go to  read a book.Go to
bed at 11 p.m.  bed at 11 p.m.
9 
OCCUPATION OCCUPATION 
SKILLS USED: 
SKILLS USED 9.
Speaking, instruction  Speaking,instruction
by example, time  by example,time
mgmt., coordinating,  mgmt.,coordinating.
athletic ability, people  athletic ability,people
skills.  skills.
SALARY & BENEFITS:  12.SALARY &BENEFITS
$32K to $62K.  $32K to $62K
for 
ORGANIZATION NAME ORGANIZATION NAME 
What do you love ab wTe
10  TECHNOLOGIES  10.TECHNOLOGIES
USED:Climbing USED: Climbing 
equipment, kayaking  equipment,kayaking
equipment, hiking  equipment,hiking
gear, compass,  gear,compass
maps.  maps.
WHAT DO YOU LOVE  13.WHAT DO YOU LOVE
ABOUT YOUR JOB:  ABOUT YOUR JOB
Median: $45K.  Median$45K
Medical, dental, vision,  Medical,dental,vision
life, acupuncture.  life,acupuncture
401K, discounts,  401K.discounts
challenge grants.  challenge grants
A completed template might look like this:  A completed template might look like this
A DAY IN THE LIFE 	
Th.corCmp A DAY IN THE LIFE
... as a(n)  as an
. 144 	
4 40,-1.1.4 
15-
vo 	 cottscleAviana• _zoffsc
lAit 
•1,;,• ;A  5.• bedroom hosSe writ, Nr. h.stwe  Luein S-tecv house rt m hshnd
Eaf DvEfst• eat- 
Co• 0,41K l'he doe  44  mprgnt a
• 
au, hly0Kci C.-   24 ..Aes 4 igas•C 
e
PRE-WORKACTIVITIES*PRE-WORK ACTIVITIES 
Environment*Environment 
mihue f Td trl,riwe OF T.doer 
- cp. ,SpreoteAt+  ponSore
17",`  soace
aet
soace
Alf Geo-r 
DS CREAT OUT
Pe
AVe
raaes
lodbace
csmch-
o
m6
mosf Celiabrefye CoworkerCustomer
nenetie
+Oner 4CS
a5e
daeYe
BAE M CnFtS
S
BK mi PGe
Chesigtes
EVERYDAY DUTIES oDeSign RWk
HOLL
 Tiela k echent Teehngs nes meehna ysiry OTHER RESPONSIBILITES
RVE
Committee
Brategy Sh
Working outside,  Working outside,
getting exercise.  getting exercise.
Getting others  Getting others
hooked on nature.  hooked on nature.
Desiar
avd= Thstyter-  LOndsesoe
TNMI 
OCCUPATION
* SKILLS USED:  SKILLS USED
Dan
HAND
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 
—  4.  ENVIRONMENT: 
ENVIRONMENT:
4
Working in nature! Working in nature! 
Various locations in  Various locations in
Bay Area. 
 r
Bay Area.
5  CULTURE:  CULTURE:
5.
Cooperative,  Cooperative,
dedication to  dedication to
environmental  environmental
stewardship,  stewardship,
outdoor adventure,  outdoor adventure
pride.  pride.
-6.  COWORKER 
COWORKER
6.
& CUSTOMER &CUSTOMER
INTERACTION:  INTERACTION
Teaching with other  Teaching with other
outdoor educators.  outdoor educators
Meeting other  Meeting other
outdoor enthusiasts.  outdoor enthusiasts
7.  EVERYDAY DUTIES: 
EVERYDAY DUTIES: Gathering supplies  Gathering supplies
and driving to and driving to 
site. Teaching  site. Teaching
hiking, kayaking,  hiking, kayaking
map reading,  map reading
compass navigation.  compass navigation.
Educating others Educating others 
about plant and  about plant and
animal life.  animal life.
14  CHALLENGES OR  14.CHALLENGES OR
ANXIETIES: Weather  ANXIETIES:Weather
can cancel classes,  can cancel classes,
participants could  participants could
get hurt. get hurt. 
aMMIMIIMMO 
for  amdpien- loWscive   for
Mdoia
c
ORGANIZATION NAME  ORGANIZATIONNAME
 sf ope c, 5eFF-055../"*.r. 
.0,4tat frms 	 *What  do you ime 
What do you love
reee
about your job7
'agates/ 	Abeut your/al,' 
reownt.unsuc.tre• ,A5ny,4,41.$41,C(.00C4 
inds/ad 104000% ,040-40.5 •
pcape I(0 perOpe r Ude 041 
t...„0 0, 	
7*0t
cos.kri 
"poc.1 ref 	4 • D'I'tivel "'D  
ocil e Diaate
 Cavn
• r PVC  of CartVot, ,4*  
Craig
fa
fa.Sb
Cea
cUttos 5; Cr'7,1tfj '''.  TECHNOLOGIES USEDE oCHNOLOGIEs USED: 
 fnancial Progm g,,,24c1611 
moviSCAD
CAD 
goramintos
pecoe,<-1 kvc 1, be  Drcse  Ke f 
omes pe/t
eDnaa
12h5
ontrret
Iunct
sali
RM•111•1114*  
@SALARY*SALARY 
Pedian i 90 Mivi on 161. 9,0 
,44.,e oZ, 	1 Sr, OA, 
0
CBENEFITS tIr  BENEFITS 
-Hen1th Cnorae
Cae.-",e 
— 	—v/ K 
 
-401K
hat-m Serefimec
r,AZZEI"eC  
Ih
LOAY
• D,Idte 	
ILy 
 4oedct
O
• what OM yew  O whot e
chalimpin or •nshetiess 
naietios?
• iuur • (44..- ZVI 
Car 
0
4
M CaV
Saties I C
• sant 1) wes  ino
Hood   Wed
fs
OS vat, 
Z iateu
. 
4Son
Si n   01105 	
etornpts• Itesettete-  loferreptt 
twerysSS  Dvress
AFTER-WORK ACTIVITES AFTER-WORN ACTIVITIES 
arinrspnsae
e Doyr
 Olerrer 	?Fa Sas ie 
• TrOttest"
2
SA c 
47.,4s6reg 
•I•., y 	
arealraco
raw- 
rem /I  '  Caps es to wo 
osmotattusa.,mw - oem ow  mono  T. Gamma,/ 
So0
O 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALV 0 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL V? 
The Career Compass  A DAY IN THE LIFE  The Career Compass A DAY IN THE LIFE
TIME  TIME
WAKE UP  WAKE UP
FEBRUARY
JANUARY
• 
 PRE-WORK ACTIVITIES  PRE-WORK ACTIVITIES
10  Environment  Environment
t  Culture  Culture
11M
MARCH TWT
... as a(n) .. as a(n)
APRIL
MAY
WORK DAY BEGINS
EVERYDAY DUTIES: TIME
JUNE
OTHER RESPONSIBILITIES:
BREAK
TIME
OCCUPATION  OCCUPATION
AUGUST SAMIWS
SEPTEMBER SMTW
SKILLS
OCTOBER
USED:
for  for
NOVEMBER
DECEM
Uaap
TECHNOLOGIES USED:
WORK DAY ENDS
TIME
ORGANIZATION NAME  ORGANIZATION NAME
L., What do you love  What do you love
about your job? about your job? 
L., What are your  What are your
challenges or anxieties?  challenges or anxieties?
L., AFTER-WORK ACTIVITIES  AFTER-WORK ACTIVITIES
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 	 VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS
Notes:  Notes
®2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL'V? 	 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL
The Career Compass  The Career Compass
63 63 
• • • 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 	 VISUAL PLANNINGSYSTEMS
Stage 8  Stage 8
PATH EXPLORATION  PATH EXPLORATION
The Career Compass  The Career Compass
So far, you've done self-assessments to get a good understanding of who you  So far,you've done self-assessments to get a good understanding of who you
are and external research to determine where you want to go and what you  are and external research to determine where you want to go and what you
want to do. With a clear sense of your goal, you may feel like you are ready to  want to do.With a clear sense of your goal,you may feel like you are ready to
start applying for jobs immediately. However, there is an additional step that  start applying for jobs immediately. However, there is an additional step that
may greatly support your future success and happiness.  may greatly support your future success and happiness.
Path Exploration is a scenario-planning exercise. For this template, we ask  Path Exploration is a scenario-planning exercise.For this template,we ask
you to plot the various career and life milestones that would correspond to a  you to plot the various career and life milestones that would correspond to a
career choice. Seeing the steps on a timeline will help you clarify your future  career choice.Seeing the steps on a timeline will help you clarify your future
actions. Planning both career and life milestones five to ten years in the  actions.Planning both career and life milestones five to ten years in the
future will also help you understand any career/life trade-offs that may affect you.  future will also help you understand any career/life trade-offs that may affect you
In addition, and most importantly, Path Exploration asks you to plot a second  In addition,and most importantly, Path Exploration asks you to plot a second
course, or backup plan. While some experience a smooth career path or  course,or backup plan.While some experience a smooth career path or
transition, others may need to regroup. Having a second option can help you  transition,others may need to regroup. Having a second option can help you
greatly if your first choice doesn't work out. A second direction could have  greatly if your first choice doesn't work out. A second direction could have
a different balance of career and life milestones that turns out to be more  a different balance of career and life milestones that turns out to be more
attractive in the long run.  attractive in the long run.
(1I• Lea., 	
PATH EXPLORATION  PATH EXPLORATION
Time flies. It's up to you to be  Time flies. It's up to you to be
the navigator.  the navigator
Robert Orben  Robert Orben
*2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL'Vr 	 O2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL
65 65 
[,71\~E:CiIr.  ~EPI.7!   PATH EXPLORATION
66 	 66
The Career Compass 	 The Career Compass
PATH EXPLORATION  PATH EXPLORATION
Plot Career and Lifestyle Goals  Plot Career and Lifestyle Goals
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 
Career decision-making often requires more than one path. You can follow your primary goal— Career decision-making often requires more than one path.You can follow your primary goal-
Path A, and achieve your objectives. However, circumstances outside your control may require a  Path A,and achieve your objectives.However,circumstances outside your control may require a
detour. Thinking through a different path now may save time and stress later. This template allows  detour. Thinking through a different path now may save time and stress later.This template allows
you to determine both your primary goals for your career and lifestyle as well as an alternative  you to determine both your primary goals for your career and lifestyle as well as an alternative
plan. In addition, this template allows you to compare two different career paths and how they may  plan.In addition,this template allows you to compare two different career paths and how they may
affect lifestyle choices differently.  affect lifestyle choices differently.
STEPS  STEPS
After completing the Choices in Context and Day in the Life templates, you should be able to make  After completing the Choices in Context and Day in the Life templates,you should be able to make
a decision regarding your preferred career goal. Follow the steps below to map out a future with  a decision regarding your preferred career goal.Follow the steps below to map out a future with
this career choice (Path A), as well as a second choice (Path B). Take time and think through your  this career choice (Path A),as well as a second choice(Path B.Take time and think through your
options in light of your current life and the life you'd like to have.  options in light of your current life and the life you'd like to have.
PATH A  PATH A
Goal/Objective: Use Path A for your first career choice. For example, it might be a new  Goal/obiective:Use Path A for your first career choice.For example.it might be a new
1
occupation, starting your own business, getting a graduate degree, changing companies  occupation, starting your own business,getting a graduate degree, changing companies
or staying with your current company but getting promotions by taking on additional  or staying with your current company but getting promotions by taking on additional
responsibilities. Write down your primary goal or objective on the top of the timeline for Path A.  responsibilities.Write down your primary goal or objective on the top of the timeline for Path A.
Significant Dates: Starting on the left, write down the date (month and year) you are  Significant Dates: Starting on the left,write down the date (month and year) you are
2.
beginning this process. Move to your right and add other significant dates below the timeline.  beginning this process. Move to your right and add other significant dates below the timeline
It may be helpful to write down milestone birthdays, such as 18, 21, 30, 40, 50, or 65. You  It may be helpful to write down milestone birthdays,such as 18,21,30,40.50.or 65.You
may also want to include the ages of your spouse, partner, parents, and/or children. If your  may also want to include the ages of your spouse,partner,parents,and/or children.If your
career choice requires education, write down when school applications are due, when the  career choice requires education,write down when school applications are due,when the
semester begins, or when summer internships may open up. The date of an important job fair  semester begins,or when summer internships may open up.The date of an important job fair
would also be significant.  would also be significant
Career Milestones: Use this horizontal stream to plan the steps you need to take in order  3. Career Milestones:Use this horizontal stream to plan the steps you need to take in order
to achieve your goal. For example, your goal might be to become a manager at your company.  to achieve your goal.For example,your goal might be to become a manager at your company
Your initial milestones might be volunteering for a task force. A bit later, you might talk with your  Your initial milestones might be volunteering for a task force.A bit later,you might talk with your
boss about your career goals; a year or two later you might take classes or attend workshops;  boss about your career goals;a year or two later you might take classes or attend workshops
and throughout your career you may be applying for positions within your organization.  and throughout your career you may be applying for positions within your organization.
If your career choice is something new to you, use the information you have gathered through  If your career choice is something new to you,use the information you have gathered through
websites, articles and informational interviews to fill in the milestones. For instance, many  websites,articles and informational interviews to fill in the milestones.For instance,many
career goals will require you to go to school before you're qualified for your new position. In  career goals will reguire you to go to school before you're qualified for your new position.In
this case, you would need to plot entrance exams, application deadlines, acceptance letters,  this case,you would need to plot entrance exams,application deadlines,acceptance letters
etc. A degree could take you two to five years; you might need to complete an internship, and  etc.A degree could take you two to five years;you might need to complete an internship,and
then you would have to search for a job after that. Or your plan could be to get experience and  then you would have to search for a job after that. Or your plan could be to get experience and
progress through several positions to your ultimate goal. Plot each of the milestones leading  progress through several positions to your ultimate goal.Plot each of the milestones leading
up to your goal.  up to your goal.
In still another case, you may be planning to get a new job within the next several months.  In still another case,you may be planning to get a new job within the next several months
Choose a realistic date for getting your new job; then, working backward, fill in the tasks  Choose a realistic date for getting your new job;then,working backward,fill in the tasks
required to get a job offer (see the following Action Plan template for help with these details).  required to get a job offer (see the following Action Plan template for help with these details
If your career goal is of a shorter rather than longer time frame, use the rest of the timeline  If your career goal is of a shorter rather than longer time frame,use the rest of the timeline
to write down career milestones that might follow accepting a job such as salary increases,  to write down career milestones that might follow accepting a job such as salary increases,
increased responsibility, promotions or relocation.  increased responsibility, promotions or relocation.
2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL 02009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL V7 
• • • 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS" 	 VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS
The Career Compass  The Career Compass
4. Life Milestones: Record significant lifestyle accomplishments you would like to fulfill and  4. Life Milestones: Record significant lifestyle accomplishments you would like to fulfill and
that would be doable given the career choice. Finances, health, relationships, environment  that would be doable given the career choice. Finances,health,relationships,environment
and leisure are some areas to think about. For some, a life milestone may be financial  and leisure are some areas to think about.For some,a life milestone may be financial
independence, finding a new place to live, moving to a new city or taking an important  independence,finding a new place to live,moving to a new city or taking an important
trip. Others may want to plot relationship-based milestones, such as marriage or children.  trip.Others may want to plot relationship-based milestones,such as marriage or children
Personal-development milestones, such as learning a new language or musical instrument,  Personal-development milestones,such as learning a new language or musical instrument
represent other possibilities. Review your completed Work/Life Wheel template and review  represent other possibilities.Review your completed Work/Life Wheel template and review
your priorities. Think about the relationship between the career choice you have made for Path  your priorities.Think about the relationship between the career choice you have made for Path
A and your lifestyle goals. There may be some life milestones that may need to be put off.  A and your lifestyle goals.There may be some life milestones that may need to be put off.
Decide what is most important to you and create a path that has the right balance for you.  Decide what is most important to you and create a path that has the right balance for you.
PATH B  PATH B
5. Now that you have a Path A that you are content with, imagine a different direction. Path  5.Now that you have a Path A that you are content with.imagine a different direction.Path
B is your chance to outline a different future, either slightly or wildly different from Path A.  B is your chance to outline a different future,either slightly or wildly different from Path A
Perhaps there was another profession that interested you while you were doing research, or  Perhaps there was another profession that interested you while you were doing research,or
maybe you know of a job opportunity that a friend or family member has communicated. Or in  maybe you know of a job opportunity that a friend or family member has communicated.Or in
another scenario, maybe you decide to stay in a current job while you go to night school, pay  another scenario,maybe you decide to stay in a current job while you go to night school,pay
off some debt and get yourself prepared for the job search at a later date. Maybe your Path  off some debt and get yourself prepared for the job search at a later date.Maybe your Path
A is conservative and with Path B you want to push your career or lifestyle ambitions further.  A is conservative and with Path B you want to push your career or lifestyle ambitions further
Having a Path B will help you remain flexible in your career planning.  Having a Path B will help you remain flexible in your career planning.
Follow Steps 1 through 4 for Path B.  Follow Steps 1 through 4 for Path B.
6. Final Evaluation: After you complete Path B, compare both paths. Is Path A still your 
Final Evaluation:After you complete Path B.compare both paths.ls Path A still your 6
preference? Which path best matches the priorities you set on your Work/Life Wheel? Which  preference? Which path best matches the priorities you set on your Work/Life Wheel? Which
path will best fulfill the primary and secondary outcomes that you recorded on the Setting Out  path will best fulfill the primary and secondary outcomes that you recorded on the Setting Out
template? Perhaps upon reflection some of your desired outcomes for career transition have  template? Perhaps upon reflection some of your desired outcomes for career transition have
shifted as you've worked through The Career Compass.  shifted as you've worked through The Career Compass.
Choose one path to work toward and one to keep on the back burner. Whichever path you  Choose one path to work toward and one to keep on the back burner.Whichever path you
choose, take comfort in knowing that you have options.  choose,take comfort in knowing that you have options.
You are now ready to move on to the Action Plan template and start searching for that perfect  You are now ready to move on to the Action Plan template and start searching for that perfect
job, internship or educational program. After you land a job, you can use Path Exploration to add  job,internship or educational program.After you land a job,you can use Path Exploration to add
additional career development and/or lifestyle milestones or revise your initial path.  additional career development and/or lifestyle milestones or revise your initial path.
Use the "Notes" page following the template to capture any additional observations or thoughts.  Use the "Notes"page following the template to capture any additional observations or thoughts
G2OO9 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL 0 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONACS\??.  
6 67 
START  START
HERE  HERE
68 68 
The Career Compass  The Career Compass
Sample Answers for Path Exploration:  Sample Answers for Path Exploration
1.  GOAL/OBJECTIVE: Public relations representative 
GOAL/OBJECTIVE:Public relations representative
for environmental organization; get M.B.A.;  for environmental organization;get M.B.A.
promotion to VP; become a pediatrician.  promotion to VPbecome a pediatrician
Tn. Care. Compass  PATH EXPLORATION 
CPATH EXPLORATION
PATH A
GOAL/OBJECTIVE
PATH A 	 00.411011.MCTIVE: 
=""  Lite  Milestones 
PATH B
GOALOL
BECTIVE
3.  CAREER MILESTONES: Complete degree, 
CAREER MILESTONES:Complete degree
3
apply for jobs, land position as customer  apply for jobs,land position as customer
service representative, move up to  service representative.move up to
supervisor, promotion to store manager. Or,  supervisor, promotion to store manager. Or
marketing coordinator, marketing manager,  marketing coordinator,marketing manager,
VP of marketing and sales. Or, apprentice,  VP of marketing and sales.Or,apprentice
journeyman, foreman. Or, associate planner,  iourneyman.foreman.Or.associate planner
associate buyer, buyer, divisional manager. Or,  associate buyer,buyer,divisional manager.Or
research franchise options, get financing, find  research franchise options,get financing.find
and lease space, prepare marketing materials,  and lease space,prepare marketing materials
hire staff, open business.  hire staff,open business
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 
2.  SIGNIFICANT DATES: Start Date: March, 2009;  SIGNIFICANT DATES:StartDateMarch.2O09
2.
turn 35; trip to Europe; loan payment due; fall  turn 35;trip to Europeloan payment duefall
semester begins.  semester begins
4.  LIFE MILESTONES: Move to California, own a  4.LIFE MILESTONES:Move to California,own a
home, enroll son in kindergarten, have solo  home,enroll son in kindergarten, have solo
gallery show, join a gym, learn to play the guitar.  gallery show,join a gym, learn to play the guitar
A completed template might look like this:  A completed template might look like this:
TCCom PATH EXPLORATION T. Came, Compass  PATH EXPLORATION 
(4„i, s, arts 	
aweiteueenverrNednliSer e 	
PATH A PATH A 
Signiieaot Significant 
wlw  at•Ht. 
Ca Carex 
hillMetones 
 
aooicTraiserenn-aech  arts mSw
light  so  'oe  Tao
+Research
Ap  kel  
LiSa hums astoienS 
o March Me Mach 1481f 
*Nthowk
.DSOM.CSI 
aOmpiek
•eowicie " 
/ 114044 	 Tlemtal
uM 
\ 
Orytnizats.40  
 Get certona ImeWce—hes  Bnance Bic
yhoe eic,fatiTga, 
Rene t.ne  E
Cner Lelers Cmetellbs 
S O
J
BEENVVOLINTBEK WICK aem
Takmch-red Vacation
70,   To Zoe
Hesba flested 
am$ 1s-nfrs lures OS-retie:1  
NETWRK
D  Si mcme
SAVE
urge  ureptace 
aoonv Gt MBA rder  ge  aCwKpce
	plIellOtiO6 
He•ezoemonye f/el! GA it,  Ceder Is 
PATH B PATH B 
SignMeant  • 
DN.  Caro..  career
11111aggsatig 
vi 
L
V ) 
D Tan so'o4  a, vi 
 Pescarc
A p Apr.l O9 
I itee 
4 410  
o Cveale pphas Tw uev2ivig
*hgoy tahn
Web  Dad sehal
Cilia ECHO I .ASPrIZA 	
proyam
funS  of
MAT T 
Trsemal sies cit,smeti stMerois 
BaPerences RecoVeCeS 
Yogp
.201-201z   20-2017
TB be  In be
  ales* GA' 
CPromoti
Grandids epy
P
\Pa .09 	:ran 20_10_ 
Ja 2oto
3w4 Pq ibstoul ibrbs 
bb  B
tell essiti
CPng
W
Cpplifi
IICYS4it 
Boina tis achat
Is aconokd
• 
TV C. in 
teler.  7rviiefremee 
6-piek 	
tag 
e Complete
C C  cow covo 
g  .motmot i4  " 
P Wme'
2N-20Z.201/120O. 
:IN be  Iwbe.
TOs taw0 dots} SO! 
GRADSCHOO
Hys 
IVbsc
y 47
Cim
tUaeafo WeeetW, 
ND K wN
Vacaf Z0-20 Iw mak Pranwhm!
anicnotnamonoma, *mama tams ma atom 
2O09THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL
0 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONACVr 
The Career Compass  PATH EXPLORATION 
PATH EXPLORATION
The Career Compass PATH A 	 PATHA
GOAL/OBJECTIVE:  GOAL/OBJECTIVE:
2 MONTHS  2 MONTHS
Significant  Significant
Dates 
Dates Career  Career
Milestones  Milestones
Life  Life
Milestones  Milestones
Start Date  Start Date
PATH B 	 PATH B
GOAL/OBJECTIVE:  GOAL/OBJECTIVE:
2 MONTHS
2 MONTHS 	
Significant  Significant
Dates  Dates
Start Date Start Date 
Career  Career
Milestones  Milestones
4 MONTHS 	
4 MONTHS 4 MONTHS 4 MONTHS 
6 MONTHS  6 MONTHS
6 MONTHS
6 MONTHS 	
1YEAR 1 YEAR 
1YEAR 1 YEAR 
2-3 YEARS  2-3 YEARS
2-3YEARS
2-3 YEARS 	
5-10 YEARS 5-10 YEARS 
5-10 YEARS 5-10 YEARS 
 
 
 
 
   
 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS- 	 VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS
Notes:  Notes:
0 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALVr 	 O 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL
The Career Compass The Career Compass 
71 
• • • 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 	
Stage 9  Stage 9
 
ACTION PLAN  ACTION PLAN
The Career Compass The Career Compass 
In the previous exercise, Path Exploration, you determined your first and  In the previous exercise,Path Exploration,you determined your first and
second choices for career paths. Whether your next career steps involve  second choices for career paths. Whether your next career steps involve
applying for a job or applying to school, the Action Plan template will help  applying for a job or applying to school,the Action Plan template will help
you stay organized and take steps toward your future.  you stay organized and take steps toward your future.
Action Plan is designed to keep you accountable to the tasks needed to get  Action Plan is designed to keep you accountable to the tasks needed to get
job offers or complete a college application process. It helps you set dates  job offers or complete a college application process.It helps you set dates
and track your progress on a time frame that you determine. In addition,  and track your progress on a time frame that you determine.In addition,
Action Plan helps you think about the conditions of your job or education  Action Plan helps you think about the conditions of your job or education
search—the supports you can call on and the challenges you may face.  search--the supports you can call on and the challenges you may face.
Finally, it keeps you focused on what a job offer must have in order for you  Finally, it keeps you focused on what a job offer must have in order for you
to be happy. Good luck!  to be happy. Good luck!
2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL' 	  2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL
ACTION PLAN  ACTIONPLAN
PCOLLATERM
We all must live our lives  We all must live our lives
always feeling, always thinking  always feeling, always thinking
the moment has arrived.  the moment has arrived.
Tracy Chapman  Tracy Chapman
13 73 
B n iMiCORIE  ACTION PLAN
   
74 	 14
The Career Compass 	 The Career Compass
ACTION PLAN  ACTION PLAN
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 
Set and Accomplish Your Goals  Set and Accomplish Your Goais
Congratulate yourself for your hard work in self-discovery and research. Now, take that momentum  Congratulate yourself for your hard work in self-discovery and research. Now,take that momentum
and create a plan for your job search. The Career Compass Action Plan is a specific job-hunt  and create a plan for your job search.The Career Compass Action Plan is a specific job-hunt
calendar that you can use to both plan your steps and keep you on task.  calendar that you can use to both plan your steps and keep you on task.
STEPS  STEPS
By completing The Career Compass Path Exploration template, you should have decided on a  By completing The Career Compass Path Exploration template,you should have decided on a
career direction. Whether one of the first milestones on your path is to get an internship, get work  career direction.Whether one of the first milestones on your path is to get an internship,get work
experience or apply for that perfect job, the Action Plan helps you organize the tasks involved. You  experience or apply for that perfect job,the Action Plan helps you organize the tasks involved.You
may also be considering undergraduate or graduate school. You can use the Action Plan for this  may also be considering undergraduate or graduate school. You can use the Action Plan for this
purpose as well, keeping in mind that there may be additional tasks involved, depending on the  purpose as well,keeping in mind that there may be additional tasks involved,depending on the
program. Feel free to change the headings on the template to fit your purposes.  program. Feel free to change the headings on the template to fit your purposes.
Occupation Choice: Look back at all the maps you have already completed and determine  1. Occupation Choice: Look back at all the maps you have already completed and determine 1. 
your occupation choice. Be specific, but also keep in mind that different organizations might  your occupation choice. Be specific,but also keep in mind that different organizations might
call the same job by another name. Or, you may choose to select a different position in your  Bnrrerenorrrroooooeetootoorrnttrronittnrioroetrroroernittrtttttroeenn
current organization. If applying to school, change the heading to "Degree Choice" and write  current organization.If applying to school, change the heading to "Degree Choiceand write
down the degree you will pursue.  down the degree you will pursue.
Start Job By: Write down the specific, time-oriented goal for this Action Plan. For example:  2. 
Start Job By:Write down the specific,time-oriented goal for this Action Plan.For example
2.
start new job by June 1. If applying to school, you can change the heading to "Start School  Sreronooirrrettrrotirtrnornrnarrtbirrrerorttrnrttrtroo
By" and put in your hoped for start date—fall semester, for example.  By" and put in your hoped for start date -fall semester, for example.
Must Have: Whether or not you are fortunate to have more than one job offer, you need to  3. 
Must Have: Whether or not you are fortunate to have more than one job offer.you need to
3.
decide if a job is best for you before you accept. Review your other filled-in Career Compass  decide if a job is best for you before you accept. Review your other filled-in Career Compass
templates to determine what you must have in a job in order to accept—it might be the salary  templates to determine what you must have in a job in order to accept -it might be the salary
range, opportunity for advancement or the actual work you'll be doing and who you will be  range,opportunity for advancement or the actual work you'll be doing and who you will be
doing it with. Sometimes a job sounds wonderful, but if it takes you away from your ultimate  doing it with.Sometimes a job sounds wonderful,but if it takes you away from your ultimate
long-term goal, you may decide to turn down an offer. If you are applying to school you may  long-term goal,you may decide to turn down an offer. If you are applying to school you may
consider tuition assistance a "must have" in order to commit to a program.  consider tuition assistance a "must have" in order to commit to a program.
Nice to Have: Similar to your "Must Have" list, use this space to write down the aspects of  4. 
Nice to Have: Similar to your "Must Have"list,use this space to write down the aspects of
4
a job that would be nice to have but are not deal breakers. For example, a short commute,  a job that would be nice to have but are not deal breakers.For example,a short commute
the benefits or bonus structure, or extra vacation could be potential items on this list. If an  the benefits or bonus structure,or extra vacation could be potential items on this list.If an
educational program is the focus of your Action Plan, you may consider things like university  educational program is the focus of your Action Plan,you may consider things like university
housing or financial aid, as some of your preferences, but not imperatives.  housing or financial aid, as some of your preferences, but not imperatives.
Complete-by Dates: At the top of each column, write down a goal date for completing the  5. 
Complete-by Dates:At the top of each column,write down a goal date for completing the 5.
tasks in each column. Later, you'll write down the actual completion dates inside the arrow.  tasks in each column.Later.you'll write down the actual completion dates inside the arrow
Use the "Start Job By" date and work backwards. Keep in mind that in many cases it may  Use the "Start Job By"date and work backwards.Keep in mind that in many cases it may
take an organization six to eight weeks for their hiring process after an ad has been posted.  take an organization six to eight weeks for their hiring process after an ad has been posted
For example, if your "Start Job By" date is June 1, you may receive offers in the second half of  For example,if your "Start Job By"date is June 1,you may receive offers in the second half of
May, your interviews may take place in the first two weeks of May, your interview prep may be  May,your interviews may take place in the first two weeks of May,your interview prep may be
completed the last half of April, your collateral materials would be sent by the second week of  completed the lasthalf of April.vour collateralmaterials would be sent bv the second week of
April, and you would have identified your targets in the first week of April. You may have more  April,and you would have identified your targets in the first week of April. You may have more
time to look for a new job, therefore your "complete-by" dates would reflect a longer time period.  time to look for a new job,therefore your "complete-by"dates would reflect a longer time period
Targets: The template gives you five organizations or school programs to track. Hopefully,  6. 
6.Targets:The template gives you five organizations or school programs to track.Hopefully
you've gained some leads from your networking efforts. In addition, use Internet job websites  you've gained some leads from your networking efforts.In addition,use Internet job websites
to find jobs or internships that are appealing. In addition, a career counselor is a great  to find jobs or internships that are appealing.In addition,a career counselor is a great
resource for specialized job-listing information. If you aren't working with a career counselor,  resource for specialized job-listing information. If you aren't working with a career counselor
2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL 0 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALVt 
• • 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS' 	
The Career Compass
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS
The Career Compass 
 You'll often find job-search
try doing an Internet search by typing in "Careers in 	" You'll often find job-search  try doing an Internet search by typing in "Careers in
websites you have never seen before. Also, check national or state professional associations  websites you have never seen before.Also,check national or state professional associations
for job boards. Print out job listings, review leads from your Networking Map, then prioritize  for job boards.Print out job listings,review leads from your Networking Map,then prioritize
your top five. Write these top-five organizations or schools in the target spaces. If you have  your top five.Write these top-five organizations or schools in the target spaces. If you have
more than five, you can put those on another Action Plan. (See Appendix.)  more than five,you can put those on another Action Plan.(See Appendix.
7. Collateral Materials: Each target job will have its own set of materials that need to be sent.  7
Collateral Materials: Each target job will have its own set of materials that need to be sent This can include an application, a resume, a portfolio, or cover letter for a job. Or, if you are  This can include an application,a resume,a portfolio,or cover letter for a job.Or,if you are
applying for school, you may need an application, transcripts, test scores and a personal  applying for school,you may need an application,transcripts,test scores and a personal
statement.  statement.
8. 
Interview Preparation: Whether or not you definitely have an interview, you should still  Interview Preparation:Whether or not vou definitely have an interview.vou should still
8.
prepare ahead of time. Research the organization, the competition, and prepare answers  prepare ahead of time.Research the organization,the competition,and prepare answers
for interview questions. A good place to find information about interviewing is www.  for interview questions.A good place to find information about interviewing is www
jobinterviewquestions.org . Practice your personal statement or "elevator speech" with a  jobinterviewquestions.org.Practice your personal statement or"elevator speech"with a
friend. Make sure you have appropriate interview clothes. You may even want to travel to the  friend.Make sure you have appropriate interview clothes. You may even want to travel to the
organization to make sure you know where it is and how much time it will take you to get there.  organization to make sure you know where it is and how much time it will take you to get there
9. 
Interviews: Once the interviews are scheduled, write down the date of your interview. If you 
9.
Interviews: Once the interviews are scheduled,write down the date of your interview.If you
are applying and interviewing at multiple companies, this will also allow you to track the dates  are applying and interviewing at multiple companies,this will also allow you to track the dates
so that you don't double-book yourself or schedule interviews too closely together. When you  so that you don't double-book yourself or schedule interviews too closely together.When you
arrive at a company, always arrive a bit early and dress for the job you want. Be prepared to  arrive at a company,always arrive a bit early and dress for the job you want.Be prepared to
ask three to four questions of your own at the end of the interview. These questions should  ask three to four questions of your own at the end of the interview. These questions should
be about performance expectations, reporting structure and professional development rather  be about performance expectations,reporting structure and professional development rather
than salary or benefits. After the interview, be sure to follow up within twenty-four hours with a  than salary or benefits. After the interview, be sure to follow up within twenty-four hours with a
thank-you note.  thank-you note.
10. Challenges: Write down the things that may hinder your progress. Consider things that are  10.Challenges:Write down the things that may hinder your progress.Consider things that are
outside of your control, like a poor economy and things you may be able to control, such as  outside of your control,like a poor economy and things you may be able to control,such as
your own personal attitudes or behaviors.Identifying challenges helps prepare you to deal with your own personal attitudes or behaviors. Identifying challenges helps prepare you to deal with 
them when they arise.  them when they arise.
11. Supports: Identify the people, places and resources that may help you with your Action  11.Supports:ldentify the people,places and resources that may help you with your Action
Plan. Write down those people who will support you in your goals. Consider working on your  Plan.Write down those people who will support you in your goals.Consider working on your
Networking Map in conjunction with your Action Plan, as your network could certainly support  Networking Map in conjunction with your Action Plan,as your network could certainly support
your efforts.Going to a library may help focus your research efforts or allow you access to the your efforts. Going to a library may help focus your research efforts or allow you access to the 
Internet if you do not have a computer.  Internet if you do not have a computer.
12. Offers: If you are lucky, you will have more than one job offer. The offer may come by phone  12.offers:If you are lucky,you will have more than one job offer.The offer may come by phone
or in writing. If you receive an offer by phone, you may ask to receive the job offer in writing  or in writing.If you receive an offer by phone,you may ask to receive the job offer in writing
and have at least twenty-four to forty-eight hours to discuss it with your family or friends. Go  and have at least twenty-four to forty-eight hours to discuss it with your family or friends. Go
back to your map and review your Must Have and Nice to Have statements to help you make  back to your map and review your Must Have and Nice to Have statements to help you make
a decision. If you have questions about the offer, call the hiring manager and discuss them  a decision.If you have questions about the offer,call the hiring manager and discuss them
before you accept. If you are expecting more than one offer, use the Date Received line in the  before you accept.If you are expecting more than one offer,use the Date Received line in the
arrow to keep track of each offer date. If you need more time to consider an offer, especially  arrow to keep track of each offer date.If you need more time to consider an offer,especially
if you expect another offer to come, be honest with the employer. You may want to refer to  if you expect another offer to come,be honest with the employer. You may want to refer to
Salary.com's Negotiation Clinic at www.salary.com .  Salary.com's Negotiation Clinic at www.salary.com.
Try not to get discouraged if you have to regroup and create a new Action Plan. It is possible that  Try not to get discouraged if you have to regroup and create a new Action Plan.It is possible that
you may not be getting offers for a particular occupation, or may not get into the school program  you may not be getting offers for a particular occupation,or may not get into the school program
that you wanted. Look back at your Path Exploration template. Often a Plan B (Path B) could work  that you wanted.Look back at your Path Exploration template.Often a Plan B(Path B)could work
out better for you than your Plan A (Path A). See the Appendix if you need an additional Action Plan.  out better for you than your Plan APath A).See the Appendix if you need an additional Action Plan
2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTSINTERNATIONAL ®2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALV.  
75 75 
START HERE
76 	 16
The Career Compass 	 The Career Compass
Sample Answers for Action Plan:  Sample Answers for Action Plan:
1. OCCUPATION 	
OCCUPATION
1
CHOICE:  CHOICE:
Registered nurse; Registered nurse; 
veterinarian; store  veterinarianstore
manager; M.A. in  managerM.A.in
Theater. Theater. 
the Can The Cares 
CompACTION PLAN
ACTION PLAN 
2. 
START JOB BY:  2.STARTJOB BY
April 1.  April 1.
G
 INTERVIEWS  • 
TARGETS 	
• 
 COLLATERAL  • 
 INTERVIEW  • 
you sent your
resume, cover letter,  resume,cover letter.
applications.and applications, and 
references.  references.
•
DTARIGETS Ellib 	
 r- 
OCCUPATION CROICE
• 
7. COLLATERAL  7.
COLLATERAL
CHALLENGES  r  	 
MATERIALS: Date  MATERIALS:Date
you sent your 
GINTERVIEW
MATERIALS. 	 PREPARATION  MATERIALS
PREPARATION
OINTERVIEWR
*SUPPORTS 
8. INTERVIEW 
INTERVIEW 8.
 OFFERS  OFFER
PREPARATION: Dates  PREPARATIONDates
you researched 
you researched company/school  company/school
and prepared for the  and prepared for the
interview.  interview.
10. CHALLENGES: It may take a long time; might  10.CHALLENGES:It may take a long time; might
not get job offer from first choice; need new  not get job offer from first choice;need new
interview clothes; transportation; need help with  interview clothestransportation;need help with
my resume.  my resume.
MUST HAVE:Salary 3. MUST HAVE: Salary  3.
of $50K, health and  of $50K.health and
dental insurance dental insurance, 
short commute,  short commute,
good manager,  good manager,
stable business.  stable business.
Row  to Rm. •
NIceo
TARTJO
Comptarcte......ve 
9. INTERVIEWS: Dates  9.INTERVIEWS:Dates
of your first and  of your first and
second interview.  second interview.
11. SUPPORTS: Family,  11.SUPPORTS:Family
spouse, career  spouse,career
counselor, library counselor, library, 
career center.  career center
A completed template might look like this:  A completed template might look like this:
ACTION PLAN
The  ems,  Compass  ACTION PLAN 
@• /PASSIS  • 
FTARGETS FE61 Fget    Tnshtute for one Wort
NH
3taJade Lre
Zearch Hespifn
TndraiSer OCCUPATIO CHOICE
taV 
ietneseati,   Boarth
AGs
thsttte moral oC  Morchon Does  Dimes
 CHALLENGES CHALLENGES 
 COLLATERAL  COLLATERAT
MATTRIALS MIATEMALS  FEB. IS P615. IS 
slt *
2 Zig 
Hio elm 
zhz  2
Zs
Needpdate•14ecti io pcla  my.veSume pi resume 
• nnaragt •meselemen  NTERVEW
PREPARATION POSPISSOMOO 
tug.4_  mAe.ae APR.  IC  MAR.1
MAR.30
APR.IS
G
CVO Ak 2
a+ 23
2/23 H
 SUPPORTS SUPPORTS • 
Husbamd.• Flusl,tm d 
Necd new iterview Clothes• Med new iAiervIeui dolises.  Really bod job mar Ket 2eally tad jab Mar Vet  Compethan frm more
them -601 more,  SHPpDPaAaxo•  itsted C4,606 45  .  Needto pay Ye+• Need -11 io F‘al re`41%  
LIM  1(zs
3hs SiTT,  ANT 4- •••• 
• K,cis .Lids.
Career Cowselor. Career C'etoi ce lac 
Netoring Contact• NetworV Ion coo MCfc .  my volun ter opeieuce.• frry Vo  I  to, itir .fipm,emce.  Passionak olbot my Wor ass.mak ottul- my u-or 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 
NICE TO HAVE 4. NICE TO HAVE:  4
Salary more than  Salary more than
$50K, 4 weeks  $50K,4weeks
paid vacation;  paid vacation;
own office, tuition  own office,tuition
reimbursement.  reimbursement.
5. COMPLETE-BY 
COMPLETE-BY
5
DATES: Select  DATESSelect
targets by Jan. 1,  targets by Jan.1.
send collateral by  send collateral by
Jan. 20, prepare for  Jan.20,prepare for
interviews Jan. 20— interviews Jan.20
Feb. 1, interviews  Feb.1,interviews
Jan. 25—Feb. 28,  Jan.25-Feb.28
offers Jan. 30—Mar.  offers Jan.30-Mar.
15 15. 
6 TARGETS: Physician  TARGETS:Physician
6.
Foundation at Cal.  Foundation at Cal.
Pacific Medial  Pacific Medial
Center, Kaiser  Center,Kaiser
Permanente, UC San  PermanenteUc San
Francisco, Arlington  Francisco,Arlington
Healthcare, Merritt  Healthcare. Merritt
Hawkins.  Hawkins.
12.OFFERS:Dates you 12. OFFERS: Dates you 
received job offers  received job offers
or acceptance to  or acceptance to
schools.  schools.
ice to Have MIL•  Now •
• God 	left 
Less Then
@Coed
 so  min commit  30 min comue
cfr,,,,ors *toss  C-norbers
O ust an Salary-go
ll Hell
eZo days vacetom(paig)
C SANYJOBY
MAY I MAY  I 
Paspect
OGreaf Sass
bvalwes Hat ol
 mir
Drnvine
bin ofothrs
hours • *cox 	
e Fjex
oUiHe Lillk 
hours
Travel
8amONwea 701•01.1Y0.1111071.10,138111 /1. 
2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL C 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL 
The Career Compass  ACTION PLAN  The Career Compass ACTION PLAN
• 
.c 0* 	4r4r0  L., COLLATERAL L. INTERVIEW 	
L INTERVIEWS L._ OFFERS 
*TARGETS 	
INTERVIEW
INTERVIEWS
OFFERS
COLLATERAL
TARGETS
Complete By
L, OCCUPATION 
OCCUPATION
CHOICE  CHOICE
PREPARATION 
MATERIALS 	
PREPARATION
MATERIALS
1st interview date  1st interview date
cl ate sent 	
d ate sent date sent
date sent 	 date sent 	 date sent
date sent 	
date sent date sent  date sent
L._ CHALLENGES 	
CHALLENGES
date completed
date completed 	
date completed  date completed
date completed date completed 
date completed date completed 
date completed
date completed 	
2nd interview date 	
2nd interview date 1st interview date 1st interview date 
2nd interview date 	
2nd interview date 1st interview date  1st interview date
2nd interview date
2nd interview date 	
1st interview date 1st interview date 
2nd interview date
2nd interview date 	
1st interview date 1st interview date 
2nd interview date 2nd interview date 
SUPPORTS  SUPPORTS
date received date received 
date received  date received
date received date received 
date received date received 
date received  date received
L__ Nice to Have  Nice to Have
L. Must Have  Must Have
STARTJOB BY
date
   
   
   
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
   
 
• 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 	 VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS
Conclusion  Conclusion
The Career Compass  The Career Compass
Congratulations. You have just completed a thoughtful and creative process  Congratulations. You have just completed a thoughtful and creative process
designed to help you change and manage your career. You have looked at your past  rrrreeereretreerrrereereerrreeeerorrnrernrorrrneereoorrreeenerte
to find patterns. You've assessed who you are at this point in time and set priorities  to find patterns. You've assessed who vou are at this point in time and set priorities
for your future. You've researched and explored different jobs and careers. Finally,  for your future.You've researched and explored different jobs and careers.Finally
you've determined what's important to you and made informed decisions for the  you've determined what's important to you and made informed decisions for the
months and years ahead.  months and years ahead.
As you enter into a new chapter in your career, keep in mind that the world of work  As you enter into a new chapter in your career, keep in mind that the world of work
is constantly changing. For instance, there are jobs that are made obsolete by new  is constantly changing. For instance,there are jobs that are made obsolete by new
technology. On the flip side, that same technology may create entire new fields.  technology.On the flip side,that same technology may create entire new fields
Not only will work change, but at different times in our lives our priorities may shift,  Not only will work change,but at different times in our lives our priorities may shift
as well. One of the most important challenges we all face is to keep up with these  as well. One of the most important challenges we all face is to keep up with these
changes. To keep yourself current, you should revisit The Career Compass process 
changes.To keep yourself current,you should revisit The Career Compass process
• 	
every three to five years.  every three to five years.
We wish you success in your career!  We wish you success in your career!
Note about The Personal Compass  Note about The Personal Compass
If while you were working through The Career Compass, you found yourself wishing  If while you were working through The Career Compass,you found yourself wishing
you could spend more time working on changing not just your career, but gaining  you could spend more time working on changing not just your career, but gaining
more insight into improving other aspects of your life, we recommend The Personal  more insight into improving other aspects of your life, we recommend The Personal
Compass.  Compass.
While The Career Compass focuses primarily on work and its relationship to your life,  While The Career Compass focuses primarily on work and its relationship to your life
The Personal Compass is a deeper exploration of your overall life purpose. The first  The Personal Compass is a deeper exploration of your overall life purpose.The first
in The Compass series, this workbook allows you to explore life goals and dreams  in The Compass series, this workbook allows you to explore life goals and dreams
beyond your career decisions. This process of reflection will help you be more  beyond your career decisions.This process of reflection will help you be more
focused and enthusiastic about your life.  focused and enthusiastic about your life.
You can purchase The Personal Compass from our website: www.grove.com .  You can purchase The Personal Compass from our website:www.grove.com
2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALr 	 G 2OO9 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALV
19 79 
• • • 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 	
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS Appendix  Appendix
The Career Compass The Career Compass 
We've included some other items to help you complete The Career Compass.  We've included some other items to help you complete The Career Compass.
Icon References  Icon References
At The Grove, we believe in the power of visuals to foster breakthrough thinking.  At The Grove,we believe in the power of visuals to foster breakthrough thinking
Working with our templates is not about artistic talent, but about capturing  Working with our templates is not about artistic talent, but about capturing
information in a big-picture way. If you want to be creative, we have included  information in a big-picture way.If you want to be creative,we have included
drawings of some items that may appear on your templates. Redraw these icons on  drawings of some items that may appear on your templates. Redraw these icons on
your templates, if you prefer, or come up with your own. Feel free to use different  your templates,if you prefer,or come up with your own.Feel free to use different
colored pens or photographs to add variety and make distinctions.  rrretreereetnreertitetneenrerrenenrtereeerrtritrrers
Additional Resources  Additional Resources
We listed some resources in the Preferences & Possibilities section and occasionally  We listed some resources in the Preferences & Possibilities section and occasionally
for some of the other templates. There are several other valuable books and  for some of the other templates.There are several other valuable books and
websites that can help you with career change and development. We have included  websites that can help you with career change and development.We have included
some of our favorites.  some of our favorites.
Additional Templates  Additional Templates
There are several templates in The Career Compass that will require extra space or  There are several templates in The Career Compass that will require extra space or
for you to repeat an exercise multiple times. For this reason, we have included extra  for you to repeat an exercise multiple times.For this reason, we have included extra
copies of the History, Choices in Context, A Day in the Life and Action Plan templates.  copies of the History,Choices in Context,A Day in the Life and Action Plan templates.
©2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL'S\.(1- 	 D 2OO9 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL
81 
OMM:rn  APPENDIX
82 	 82
The Career Compass 	 The Career Compass
Icon References  Icon References
Yri 
AREA OF STUDY AREA OF STUDY/ 
REPORT REPORT 
UPWARD TREND 	 UPWARD TREND
ASPIRATION
ASPIRATION 	 THINKING/ 	 THINKING/
ANALYTICAL 	 ANALYTICAL
CLASS/ CLASS/ 
SEMINAR/TEACHING/ SEMINAR/TEACHING/ 
PRESENTING PRESENTING 
DIPLOMA DIPLOMA 
TEST
TEST 	
EXCITING/COMPELLING/
DOWNWARD TREND
BIG DECISION
DOWNWARD TREND 	
EXCITING/COMPELLING/ 	BIG DECISION 	
KEY EVENT/INSIGHT  KEY EVENT/INSIGHT
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS  VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS
CHANGE CHANGE 
GOAL GOAL 
II 	
II 	 It 	
It 
IDEA 	 IDEA
c2  FEELING 	 FEELING
WRA 4§4 
PEOPLE PEOPLE 
CHALLENGING CHALLENGING 
JUDGING/ 	 JUDGING/
PLANNING 	 PLANNING
Now
INTROVERTED
INTROVERTED 	
.7.8fruee)3 
FUTURE I 3   0 ck 
SENSING/
SENSING/ 	
11(  INTUITIVE/
INTUITIVE/ 	 BIG PICTURE
EXTROVERTED EXTROVERTED 
 
I / 
PERCEIVING/ PERCEIVING/ 
HERE AND NOW 	BIG PICTURE 	 HERE AND NOW
1/0
EXERCISE/LEISURE
EXERCISE/STRENGTH
EXERCISE/LEISURE 	EXERCISE/STRENGTH 	
FUN FUN 
SPONTANEOUS SPONTANEOUS 
<4)/   I I 
STRESS STRESS 
2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL © 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALV.- 
 
 
• 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS' 	 VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS
PERSONAL/ 	 PERSONAL/
PROFESSIONAL 	
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT  DEVELOPMENT
HOUSE  HOUSE
CAR/COMMUTE 	 CAR/COMMUTE
All  SCIENCE 	 SCIENCE
0 
GAP 	
GAP BUILDING BUILDING 
PUBLIC 	 PUBLIC
TRANSPORTATION 	 TRANSPORTATION
HEALTH CARE 	 HEALTH CARE
BE
LAW/ POLICY  LAW/POLICY
WORK 	 WORK
M
The Career Compass  The Career Compass
1-0  TEACHING/PRESENTING 
TEACHING/PRESENTING
RELATIONSHIPS/ 	 RELATIONSHIPS/
RELATIONSHIPS 	
WORKING WITH PEOPLE WORKING WITH PEOPLE 
RELATIONSHIPS
CITY/OFFICES CITY/OFFICES 
TRAVEL 	
TRAVEL +111
MATH 	 MATH
CUBICLE  CUBICLE
TREE/NATURE  TREE/NATURE
ARTS/ENTERTAINMENT 	
ENTERTAINMENT/  ENTERTAINMENT/
ARTS/ENTERTAINMENT
ADVERTISING  ADVERTISING
FINANCE
FINANCE 	
WRITING/EDITING 	 PHYSICAL WORK  WRITING/EDITING
PHYSICALWORK
READING/PUBLISHING/ 	 READING/PUBLISHING/
RESEARCHING  RESEARCHING
2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL (T 	 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL
COMPUTER WORK/  COMPUTERWORK/
SYSTEMS/RESEARCH  SYSTEMS/RESEARCH
PROTECTIVE SERVICES  PROTECTIVE SERVICES
83  83
84 	 84
The Career Compass 	 The' Career Compass
Additional Resources  Additional Resources
BOOKS BOOKS 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS' 
Bolles, Richard Nelson. What Color Is Your Parachute? 2009: A Practical Manual for Job-Hunters and  BollesRichard Nelson.What Color Is Your Parachute? 2009:A Practical Manual for Job-Hunters and
Career-Changers. 2009 ed. Ten Speed Press, 2008.  Career-Changers.2009 ed.Ten Speed Press.2008.
Briggs Myers, Isabel. Gifts Differing: Understanding Personality Type. Davies-Black Publishing,  Briggs Myers,Isabel.Gifts Differing:Understanding Personality Type.Davies-Black Publishing
1995.  1 95
Buckingham, Marcus and Donald Clifton. Now, Discover Your Strengths. Free Press, 2001.  Buckingham,Marcus and Donald Clifton.Now,Discover Your Strengths.Free Press,2001
Gebhard, Nathan and Mike Marriner and Joanne Gordon. Roadtrip Nation: A Guide to Discovering  Gebhard.Nathan and Mike Marriner and Joanne Gordon. Roadtrip NationA Guide to Discovering
Your Path in Life. Ballantine Books, 2006.  Your Path in Life.Ballantine Books,2006.
Harvard Business Review Paperback Series. Harvard Business Review on Work and Life Balance.  Harvard Business Review Paperback Series. Harvard Business Review on Work and Life Balance.
Harvard Business School Press, 2000.  Harvard Business School Press,2000.
Ireland, Susan. The Complete Idiot's Guide to the Perfect Resume. 4th ed. Alpha, 2006.  Ireland,Susan.The Complete Idiot's Guide to the Perfect Resume.4th ed.Alpha,2006
Keirsey, David and Marilyn Bates. Please Understand Me: Character & Temperament Types. 5th ed.  KeirseyDavid and Marilyn Bates.Please Understand MeCharacter & Temperament Types.5th ed
Prometheus Nemesis Book Company, 1984.  Prometheus Nemesis Book Company,1984
Krumboltz, John and Al Levin. Luck Is No Accident: Making the Most of Happenstance in Your Life  Krumboltz,John and Al Levin.Luck Is No Accident:Making the Most of Happenstance in Your Life
and Career. Impact Publishers, 2004.  and Career.Impact Publishers,2004
Rath, Tom. StrengthsFinder 2.0: A New and Upgraded Edition of the Online Test from Gallup's Now,  RathTom.StrengthsFinder 2.O:A New and Upgraded Edition of the Online Test from Gallup's Now
Discover Your Strengths. Gallup Press, 2007.  Discover Your Strengths.Gallup Press,2007
Sher, Barbara. I Could Do Anything If I Only Knew What It Was: How to Discover What You Really Want  Sher,Barbara.I Could Do Anything If I Only Knew What It Was:How to Discover What You Really Want
and How to Get It. Dell, 1995.  and How to Get It.Dell.1995
Tieger, Paul D. and Barbara Barron. Do What You Are: Discover the Perfect Career for You Through  Tieger Paul D.and Barbara Barron. Do What You Are:Discover the Perfect Career for You Through
the Secrets of Personality Type. 4th ed. Little, Brown & Co., 2007.  the Secrets of Personality Type.4th ed.Little,Brown & Co.,2007
Yate, Martin. Knock 'em Dead 2009: The Ultimate Job Search Guide. Adams Media, 2008.  Yate,Martin.Knock 'em Dead 2009:The Ultimate Job Search Guide.Adams Media,2008.
Yate, Martin. Knock 'ern Dead Resumes: Features the Latest Information on: Online Postings, Email  Yate,Martin.Knock em Dead Resumes:Features the Latest Information onOnline Postings,Email
Techniques, and Follow-up Strategies. 8th ed. Adams Media, 2008.  Techniques,and Follow-up Strategies.8th ed.Adams Media,2008
2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTSINTERNATIONAL 0 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALV' 
• • 
VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS' 	
VISUAL PLANNIG SYSTEMS WEBSITES*  WEBSITES*
The Career Compass The Career Compass 
Authentic Happiness, hosted by Dr. Martin Seligman at University of Pennsylvania:  Authentic Happiness,hosted by Dr. Martin Seligman at University of Pennsylvania
http://www.authentichappiness.sas.upenn.edu/Default.aspx   http://www.authentichappiness.sas.upenn.edu/Default.aspx
Career Interests Game: http://career.missouri.edu/students/explore/thecareerinterestsgame.php   Career Interests Game:http://career.missouri.edu/students/explore/thecareerinterestsgame.php
Hoover's, Inc: http://www.hoovers.com/  Hoover's, Inc: http//www.hoovers.com/
Job Hunter's Bible—Richard Bolles: http://www.jobhuntersbible.com/  Job Hunter's Bible-Richard Bolles:http//www.jobhuntersbible.com/
Job Interview Questions: http://www.jobinterviewquestions.org/  Job Interview Questions:http//www.jobinterviewguestions.org
National Career Development Association: http://www.ncda.org/  National Career Development Association:http://www.ncda.org
Occupational Information Network—O*NET OnLine: http://online.onetcenter.org/  Occupational Information Network-O*NET OnLine:http//online.onetcenter.org/
Quintessential Careers: http://www.quintcareers.com/  Ouintessential Careers:http//www.quintcareers.com/
Salary.com:  http://www.salary.com/  Salary.com:http://www.salary.com/
Selfcounseling.com:http://www.selfcounseling.com/help/personalsuccess/personalvalues.html Selfcounseling.com:  http://www.selfcounseling.com/help/personalsuccess/personalvalues.html  
Self-Directed Search by Dr. John Holland: http://www.self-directed-search.com/  Self-Directed Search by Dr.John Holland:http//www.self-directed-search.com/
StrengthsQuestTm: https://www.strengthsquest.com   StrengthsQuestTM:https://www.strengthsquest.com
The Keirsey Temperament Sorters II: http://keirsey.com/  The Keirsey Temperament SorterII:http//keirsey.com/
Wetfeet: http://www.wetfeet.com/  Wetfeet:http//www.wetfeet.com/
Wall Street Journal Careers:http://online.wsj.com/public/page/news-career-jobs.html Wall Street Journal Careers: http://online.wsj.com/public/page/news-career-jobs.html  
* The website sources listed were available at the time of publication.We apologize if websites have changed* The website sources listed were available at the time of publication. We apologize if websites have changed. 
2009HEGROVECONSULTANTSINTERNATIONAL 0 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALV.-  
 5 85 
86 	 86
The Career Compass 	 The Career Compass
Photocopying Policy  Photocopying Policy
VSAL PNG SYST VISUAL PLANNING SYSTEMS 
We at The Grove are committed to sharing our methodology and tools worldwide in  We at The Grove are committed to sharing our methodology and tools worldwide in
the interest of helping others visualize and make meaningful change. We strive to  the interest of helping others visualize and make meaningful change. We strive to
keep our tools affordable to help as many people as possible. Therefore, we ask  keep our tools affordable to help as many people as possible.Therefore,we ask
that you honor our copyrights and do not photocopy, reproduce by hand or reproduce  that you honor our copyrights and do not photocopy, reproduce by hand or reproduce
by any electronic means any portion of The Career Compass without our prior written  by any electronic means any portion of The Career Compass without our prior written
consent—unless it is strictly for your own personal career-planning use. We would  consent-unless it is strictly for your own personal career-planning use.We would
be happy to discuss a licensing agreement if you are implementing The Career  be happy to discuss a licensing agreement if you are implementing The Career
Compass in an organization or school. Please contact us at 415.561.2500.  Compass in an organization or school.Please contact us at 415.561.2500.
C 2OO9 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONAL 0 2009 THE GROVE CONSULTANTS INTERNATIONALr 
